A reusable discrete event simulation model for improving orthopedic
waiting lists
Boyle, L., & Mackay, M. (2023). A reusable discrete event simulation model for improving orthopedic waiting
lists. In 2022 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC): Proceedings (pp. 973-984). (Winter Simulation Conference
(WSC): Proceedings). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc..
https://doi.org/10.1109/WSC57314.2022.10015512

Published in:
2022 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC): Proceedings



Document Version:
Peer reviewed version



Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal


Publisher rights
Copyright 2023, IEEE.
This work is made available online in accordance with the publisher’s policies. Please refer to any applicable terms of use of the publisher.



General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated
with these rights.


Take down policy
The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to
ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the
Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk.


Open Access
This research has been made openly available by Queen's academics and its Open Research team. We would love to hear how access to
this research benefits you. – Share your feedback with us: http://go.qub.ac.uk/oa-feedback




Download date:24. Feb. 2025

Proceedings of the 2022 Winter Simulation Conference
B. Feng, G. Pedrielli, Y. Peng, S. Shashaani, E. Song, C.G. Corlu, L.H. Lee, P. Lendermann, eds.



A REUSABLE DISCRETE EVENT SIMULATION MODEL FOR IMPROVING ORTHOPEDIC
                            WAITING LISTS


                   Laura Boyle                                                Mark Mackay

    Mathematical Sciences Research Centre                         Public Health and Tropical Medicine
         Queen’s University Belfast                                      James Cook University
           University Rd, Belfast                                          1 James Cook Dr
         N. Ireland, BT7 1NN, UK                                   Douglas QLD 4811, AUSTRALIA



ABSTRACT
Waiting lists for orthopedic treatment in Australia are lengthy and frequently breach time-based performance
targets, due to high demand and limited resources. This paper presents a discrete event simulation model
of an orthopedic treatment pathway in Australia from the point of referral to surgical intervention for knee
pain patients. The simulation model was used to investigate strategies for reducing the backlog of patients
and average waiting time for initial orthopedic review, showing that a reduction of 34% in average waiting
time can be achieved by adding three additional appointments per week. The model demonstrates that
introduction of community-based rehabilitation early in the patient journey can significantly reduce waiting
lists and improve patient recovery, without the need for surgical intervention. This simulation model has
been designed to be reusable for other types of orthopedic conditions, and for use in other health services.

1   INTRODUCTION
Public hospital orthopedic services are difficult to provide in a timely manner due to high demand and
constraints on hospital resources. Consequently, patients can remain on waiting lists for extended periods
of time. This problem has been exacerbated by frequent cancellation of elective surgeries due to re-
prioritization of services during the COVID-19 pandemic. In Australia, the percentage of patients who
waited longer than a year on an elective surgery waiting list increased from 2.8% in 2019-20 to 7.6% in
2020-21 (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2022). Between 2019-20 and 2020-21, the greatest
increase was observed for ‘Total knee replacement’, with an increase from 11% to 32% in the proportion
of patients who waited longer than a year and an increase from 223 to 308 in number days waited at the
50th percentile. This problem is ongoing - January 2022 saw further cancellation of elective procedures
in Australia during a surge of COVID-19 cases. Delays in receiving treatment can be associated with
adverse outcomes for patients, for example prolonged pain, lower mobility, and weight fluctuation due to
an inability to exercise.
     In this study, we investigate the process of orthopedic treatment in an Australian health service, from the
point of referral to surgical intervention. In a number of cases, surgical intervention can be avoided through
participation in community-based rehabilitation programmes. In the context of current exacerbated waiting
times for knee replacement surgery, we parameterize the model with data relating to patients presenting
with knee problems. The model is generalizable and can be easily re-parameterized with data concerning
different orthopedic conditions within the service.
     The aims of this research were to (i) develop a discrete event simulation model which is representative
of the current orthopedic service delivery, (ii) examine the projected pressure on the service over a five-year
period if no interventions are made, (iii) investigate the increase in capacity required to reduce waiting times

                                             Boyle and Mackay

and clear a backlog of waiting patients, and (iv) experiment with increasing access to community-based
rehabilitation to improve outcomes and potentially negate the need for surgery.
    This paper presents the following contributions:

    •   the literature on discrete event simulation of orthopedic services is reviewed and the potential for
        reusing an existing model is discussed;
    •   a new high-level discrete event simulation model of an Australian orthopedic service is presented
        and used to investigate ways of reducing waiting times;
    •   the model can be reused for other orthopedic services (e.g., hip replacements) and in other health
        services.

    Section 2 includes a review of the literature on discrete event simulation models of orthopedic services.
The possibility of using an existing model is explored and the barriers to adapting that model for reuse are
discussed. Section 3 presents the conceptual simulation model design, model logic, data, and parameters.
Section 4 shows the baseline model results and the results from scenario experimentation. Section 5 includes
a discussion of the study and outlines future work.

2   LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Discrete Event Simulation Models of Orthopedic Services
At the outset of of this research project, the authors examined the existing literature, with the aim
of determining whether a suitable model already existed that could be reused and adapted for our study.
Orthopedic healthcare is a complex system with multiple components (typically referral, various appointments
with medical and allied health staff, physiotherapy, and surgery). A review of the existing literature on
discrete event simulation (DES) applied to improve patient flow through orthopedic services identified a
variety of different model structures and objectives.
     The majority of studies focused on a single component of orthopedic services. Individual hospital
clinics were the most frequently modelled component of orthopedic services, with many papers producing
detailed models of specific hospital clinics. Rohleder et al. (2011) created a DES model of an orthopedic
clinic in the USA, demonstrating that improvements to patient throughput time could be made by optimizing
staff levels and improving appointment scheduling (without the need for additional resources). Baril et al.
(2014) focused on optimizing the performance of an orthopedic clinic using a detailed DES model with
design of experiments. The authors focused on appointment scheduling to improve clinic performance
from the perspective of both patients and staff. Ltaif et al. (2022) combined DES with goal-programming
optimization to find a queuing configuration which would maximize patient satisfaction within a Tunisian
hospital orthopedic clinic.
     Some studies have focused on creating a detailed simulation that is applicable to more than one
orthopedic clinic. Weerawat et al. (2014) presented a ‘generic’ DES model, applied to five wards in the
same hospital orthopedic clinic in Thailand by modifying input parameters. In this study the model was
designed to quantify the impact of proposed initiatives on key performance indicators, such as patient
waiting times. The model is highly detailed and would require adaptation for use in a different hospital or
healthcare system. Suhaimi et al. (2018) identified that many existing simulation models share common
features but are rarely reused. The authors remark that this is due to model logic and parameterization which
is tied to a specific hospital or healthcare system, and would require substantial time and effort to transport
to a new setting. A new ‘flexible’ DES model for orthopedic clinics was presented and demonstrated with
application to two clinics in the USA. The model is designed to analyse length of stay-based performance
measures under various staff scheduling configurations.
     In contrast, some of the published literature has focused on creating high-level models of orthopedic
services, which are modelled in a lower level of detail or as part of a wider system. Demir et al. (2017)
created a DES decision support tool to forecast patient demand within a UK hospital trust over a five year

                                             Boyle and Mackay

period. The forecasted demand on outpatient orthopedic resources was captured in the simulation, where
orthopedics services were not modelled in any detail. Bowers et al. (2015) presented a DES model of
a musculoskeletal physiotherapy service with 9 clinic locations in the UK. The model objective was to
understand the impact of patient decision-making (choice of clinic) and various management options on
the flow of patients through the system.
    The aims of this research paper (outlined in Section 1) involve modeling multiple interacting components
of an orthopedic service pathway. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one model on orthopedic
services which is sufficiently similar for comparison, which is discussed in the next section.

2.2 Reuse of Orthopedic Discrete Event Simulation Models
The literature on discrete event simulation applied to model health services is vast. One contributing factor
to the large volume of literature is a lack of model reuse - the majority of published simulation studies have
developed a new bespoke model for a specific unit (e.g., emergency department) and facility (e.g., hospital)
which cannot be easily transported to a different setting (Günal and Pidd 2010). Interest in simulation model
reuse dates back at least twenty years. Robinson et al. (2004) proposed that this lies along a spectrum, for
example reuse of code, reuse of conceptual models, or reuse of complete models. The authors suggested
that reuse should intuitively save time and cost in model development.
     ‘Generic’ or ‘generalizable’ models have been suggested as a means for improving model reuse. Fletcher
and Worthington (2009) proposed that “ ‘generic’ hospital models suggest a potential for understanding
general problems faced by hospitals and the potential general solutions to improve service delivery”.
Complementary to these are ‘generalizable’ models, defined by Boyle et al. (2022) as ‘those that can
represent multiple units and, through customization using real data, be used to investigate site-specific
problems’. In this study we initially aimed to reuse an existing simulation model by adapting it to suit
our problem setting. Some of the models discussed in Section 2.1 are labeled as generic and aim towards
model reusability (Weerawat et al. 2014; Suhaimi et al. 2018), however these models are designed for
detailed modeling of orthopedic clinics within hospitals and are therefore unsuited for our aim of modeling
multiple components on an orthopedic service pathway.
     The only model identified by the authors which concerned a sufficiently similar problem-setting to
merit consideration for reuse was that developed by Comans et al. (2017). It modelled multiple components
of a musculoskeletal (orthopedic) service in Australia, from patient referral to surgical intervention. The
authors used a mixed-methods simulation, where discrete event simulation was used to capture the flow
of patients through the conceptual flow diagram shown in Figure 1 and agent based simulation was used
to model patient characteristics. The patient flow diagram shown in Figure 1 is similar to the conceptual
model we present in Section 3 and therefore we planned to reuse it with some adaptations.




    Figure 1: Conceptual model of musculoskeletal (orthopedic) services from Comans et al. (2017).

                                               Boyle and Mackay

    The key differences between the Figure 1 model and our study are summarized in Table 1. This is
included to demonstrate that the model could theoretically be adapted with relatively minor changes. It is
not intended to provide an exhaustive list of differences between the two models.
        Table 1: Proposed adaptations to reuse the Comans et al. (2017) model in a different setting.
    Comans et al. (2017)                    Current study               Proposed adaptation
    1. All orthopedic conditions            Only knee conditions        Reflect with a lower arrival rate and
       plus neurology included.             included.                   reduced resource availability.
    2. One type of specialist .             Two types of specialist.    Include another activity with queue.
    3. Agent-based simulation used          Attributes not              Remove attributes from model code.
       to model patient attributes.         considered.
    3. Patients see specialist or physio    Patients can have physio    Adjust the model routing logic to
       (not both simultaneously).           and other appointments      enable other pathways.
                                            concurrently.
    4. Patients see specialist or physio.   Patients can have physio.   Adjust the model routing logic.
    5. Surgery not modelled.                Surgery is modelled.        Include another activity with queue.

     We contacted the authors of Comans et al. (2017), who shared their AnyLogic model with us for
reuse. At this stage it became clear that we would not be able to easily adapt their model within the project
time-frame. The main barriers to reusing the model were as follows: (i) it was not constructed to visually
align with the flow diagram in Figure 1, (ii) it was developed using multiple interlinked model structures,
(iii) there were a large number of errors associated with transporting the model to a different computer
operating system, (iv) the model was complex and difficult to decipher without detailed documentation, and
(v) there were features of the model that were incompatible with the AnyLogic personal learning edition. It
was therefore necessary to develop a new simulation model in AnyLogic to achieve the project objectives
within an appropriate time-scale. The aforementioned barriers were taken into consideration throughout
the model building process to minimize the difficulties involved with subsequent model reuse.

3     SIMULATION MODEL DESIGN
3.1 Conceptual Model
Figure 2 shows the conceptual model, from onset of knee pain to orthopedic surgery. The conceptual model
was developed iteratively through analysis of data and discussions with various stakeholders, including
orthopedic physiotherapists, physicians, and surgeons.
    Patients develop knee pain and enter the system through a referral to orthopedic services (either through
presentation to a General Practitioner (GP), emergency departments, or specialist clinics). The arrival of
patients (referred for orthopedic services) is the only place where new entities are generated in the model.
The majority of referred patients are added to a waiting list for an orthopedic review appointment. A small
number of urgent cases are referred directly to the waiting list for an orthopedic surgeon.
    Patients queue for an orthopedic review appointment. Each year approximately 100 patients leave the
waiting list (e.g., due to accessing private a healthcare service) and this process was replicated in the model.
The orthopedic review takes one day and determines the next treatment actions for the patient. Patients can

      1. withdraw from treatment (and therefore the system),
      2. be discharged from the system (with or without attending community-based rehabilitation),
      3. be added to the waiting list for a follow up orthopedic review appointment (with or without attending
         community-based rehabilitation), or
      4. be referred to the waiting list for orthopedic surgical review (with or without community-based
         rehabilitation).

                                                 Boyle and Mackay

In pathways 2-4, patients can be simultaneously queuing for appointments and attending the community-
based rehabilitation programme. This was modelled in the simulation by ‘splitting’ entities to allow
progression simultaneously through both activities. Patients queue for the community-based rehabilitation
programme, which lasts for six or twelve weeks.


                            Patient           Referral to
                         presents with       orthopaedic
                           knee pain           services




                       Urgent
                                             Non-urgent


                                              Queue for
                                             orthopaedic
                                                review



                          Queue for
                            repeat           Orthopaedic
                         orthopaedic            review
                            review


                                                              Rehabilitation     Queue for
                      Review appointment                                        community-
                                                                treatment
                                                                                  based
                                           Surgical pathway                    rehabilitation

                                              Queue for
                                                                                                Recovers or
                                             orthopaedic                                         withdraws
                                               surgeon
                                                review                         Community-
                                                                                  based
                                                                               rehabilitation

                                             Orthopaedic
                                              surgeon
                                                review




                                           Surgery required

                                              Queue for
                                             orthopaedic
                                               surgery
                                                                       Recovers or
                                                                        withdraws

                                             Orthopaedic
                                               surgery



                                                                                                   Return to
                                                                                                  community




                           Figure 2: Conceptual model of orthopedic services.

   Patients queue while waiting for an orthopedic surgical review appointment to become available, after
which they can be referred for surgical joint replacement or can withdraw from the system. Patients who

                                              Boyle and Mackay

will undergo surgical joint replacement are added to a waiting list for a theater slot. The time they spend
in theater and subsequent recovery was modelled using a probability distribution. The model assumes that
treatment is completed and patients return to the community after surgical joint replacement.

3.2 Model Logic and Parameters
The model was written using AnyLogic software. This was chosen so that the model could be accessed and
reused by anyone via the freely available personal learning edition, and because the visual interface would
facilitate communication of the model findings with stakeholders in the healthcare system. The model
logic was developed through iterative consultations with healthcare staff and stakeholders, facilitated by the
conceptual model presented in Figure 2 above. A combination of expert opinion and hospital data was used
to develop the model logic and to populate the model parameters. This information is summarized in Tables
2 and 3. Data from the system spanning January 2017 - December 2019 was used to calculate the model
parameters. It was decided to omit the data from January 2020 onwards for this purpose due to the impact
of COVID-19 on healthcare operations, including a reduction in the number of patients presenting for
medical treatment and the cancellation of many elective appointments and operations (Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare 2022). A future iteration of the model could include the impact of COVID-19 on
the system during this time.
     The entities of the model are patients who present as referrals to to orthopedic services. The model
incorporates the assumption that patients do not have any attributes (e.g., age or priority grouping) that affect
their progression through the system. This is an appropriate assumption because it was not relevant to the
modeling objectives and it helps to reduce model complexity. Table 2 displays the logic for routing patients
through the simulation model. All of the logic for routing patients is achieved by using a percentage profile,
ascertained where possible from hospital data and otherwise from expert opinion. For example, expert
opinion determined that 98% of patients are routed from referral to orthopedic review, with a minority 2%
routed directly to orthopedic surgeon review.
            Table 2: Model logic for routing entities through the various orthopedic pathways.
   From node                To node                                       Baseline value     Data source
   Referral                 Orthopedic review                             98 %               Expert opinion
                            Orthopedic surgeon review                     2%
   Orthopedic review        Withdraw from system                          36%                Hospital data
                            Discharged (with rehabilitation)              1%
                            Discharged (no rehabilitation)                29%
                            Follow up review (with rehabilitation)        3%
                            Follow up review (no rehabilitation)          1%
                            Orthopedic surgeon (with rehabilitation)      21%
                            Orthopedic surgeon (no rehabilitation)        9%
   Rehabilitation queue     6-week programme                              83 %               Expert opinion
                            12-week programme                             17 %
   Orthopedic surgeon       Withdraw from system                          11 %               Expert opinion
                            Surgical joint replacement                    89%

    Patients are assumed to arrive according to a Poisson process with an intensity of 10 referrals per week.
This value was derived from the orthopedic referral data records (pre-pandemic). As shown in Table 2,
there are 5 activities in the model. Referral to orthopedic services takes approximately one week. The
orthopedic review and surgical consultations are modelled using a duration of one day. Community-based
rehabilitation is either six or twelve weeks (determined using the probability profile in Table 2). Orthopedic

                                            Boyle and Mackay

surgery requires a length of stay in hospital between 1 and 14 days and is defined in the model as empirical
distribution calculated using hospital data.
     The authors adopted the assumption that all queues in the model have a first-in-first-out discipline.
The queues for orthopedic review, community-based rehabilitation, surgical consultation, and orthopedic
surgery were initialized with 1200, 0, 11, and 15 patients respectively (determined through expert opinion).
Each year approximately 100 patients leave the waiting list for orthopedic review (e.g., due to accessing
private a healthcare service) and this process was replicated in the model. The availability of places on the
community-based rehabilitation programmes was modelled using a resource, where 20 spaces are available
to be seized by patients for a duration of either six or twelve weeks (depending on the programme they
have been routed to). Appointments for orthopedic review, surgical review, and theater were modelled
using a ‘booking process’, where the time between bookable appointments was represented using recent
hospital data.
  Table 3: Parameters and distributions used in the orthopedic DES. The model time-scale is in weeks.
 Parameter                           Distribution    Baseline value           Data source
 Arrival process
 Patient arrivals                    Poisson         λ = 10                   Hospital data
 Activities
 Referral                            Deterministic   1 week                   Expert opinion
 Orthopedic review                                   1 day
 Community-based rehabilitation                      6 or 12 weeks
 Surgical consultation                               1 day
 Orthopedic surgery                  Distribution    Empirical                Hospital data
 Queues
 Orthopedic review                   FIFO            Initial length = 1200    Expert opinion
 Community-based rehabilitation      FIFO            Started from empty
 Surgical consultation               FIFO            Initial length = 11
 Orthopedic surgery                  FIFO            Initial length = 15
 Resources
 Physiotherapists                    20 physiotherapist resources               Expert opinion
 Assumptions                         1. First-in-first-out discipline for all queues.
                                     2. 100 patients per year removed from orthopedic review queue.
                                     3. Availability of orthopedic review appointments, surgical review
                                     appointments, and theater slots modelled using a ‘booking process’.
 Simplifications                     1. No patient attributes are modelled (e.g., priority grouping/age).

3.3 Model Verification and Validation
The model outputs of interest were the mean waiting time and mean number of waiting patients in each of
the ‘orthopedic review’, ‘community-based rehabilitation’, ‘surgical consultation’, and ‘orthopedic surgery’
queues. It was also of interest to examine the mean length of the queue for orthopedic consultation after
5 years of simulated time.
     Model verification was performed to ensure that the conceptual model was accurately translated into
AnyLogic software (Banks et al. 2000). This was achieved by (i) updating and maintaining documentation
throughout the model building process, (ii) exploring the model output under various changes to the input
parameter distributions to make sure that it behaved as expected, (iii) making use of the AnyLogic visual
interface to visually check the model logic (in collaboration with hospital staff and stakeholders).

                                           Boyle and Mackay

    Validation was carried out by comparing the baseline model outputs against data from the real system.
The baseline model was run 50 times using different random number streams in AnyLogic and the model
outputs are presented in the following section.

3.4 Model Reusability
This model was designed to be re-usable for simulating other orthopedic services in Australia and inter-
nationally. The following steps were taken to achieve re-usability:

    1. the conceptual model was designed to be as simple as possible;
    2. all aspects of the STRESS-DES guidelines (Monks et al. 2019) for strengthening the reporting of
       simulation studies were used;
    3. an open-source version of AnyLogic was used so that the model can be shared;
    4. the AnyLogic model was designed to visually resemble the conceptual model in a simple flow
       diagram format;
    5. all of the AnyLogic model components and variables were meaningfully labelled.

Some modifications to the conceptual model may be necessary for re-use. Given the simplicity of the
model, this could easily be achieved by changing any activities and routing arrows as necessary. The model
could also be used for any other orthopedic service pathways (e.g., patients presenting with hip pain).

4   RESULTS
Table 4 shows the baseline model outputs. The results demonstrate that mean waiting times from the
simulation were a close match to those from the real system - in most cases the 95% confidence interval
(CI) includes the mean waiting time from the data. The exception to this was the mean waiting time for
orthopedic surgery, which was underestimated because the competing demand in theater for other types of
operations was not modelled. The mean queue lengths were validated through discussions with the hospital
staff, who confirmed them to be a reasonable match to the real system. The involvement of stakeholders
in model validation is typically used in health care projects when data from the system is not available
(Eldabi 2009).
                     Table 4: Results obtained from the baseline simulation model.
            Queue                                Mean - data    Mean (95% CIs) - simulation
            Orthopedic Review
            Waiting time (weeks)                 100            107.9 (104.6,111.2)
            Queue length                                        1389.5 (1346.3,1432.7)
            Community-based rehabilitation
            Waiting time (weeks)                 5              4.135 (1.1,7.1)
            Queue length                                        6.1 (1.4,10.8)
            Surgical consultation
            Waiting time (weeks)                 20             17.8 (14.9,20.7)
            Queue length                                        56.5 (44.3,68.6)
            Orthopedic surgery
            Waiting time (weeks)                 4              1.2 (0.9,1.5)
            Queue length                                        2.2 (1.9,2.5)

    The validated simulation model was used to explore two types of scenario which would reduce the
backlog of patients waiting for an orthopedic review appointment:

                                             Boyle and Mackay

   1. Scenario Type A: the availability of orthopedic review appointments was increased to examine
      the expected reduction in queue length. This was achieved by routing a proportion of patients to
      additional appointment slots.
   2. Scenario Type B: at the point of referral, a proportion of patients were routed directly to community-
      based rehabilitation services. The experiment assumes that these patients recover and return to the
      community based on an early rehabilitation and education-based intervention.

A range of parameter values were explored for each scenario type and the results of which are presented in
Table 5. In Type A scenarios, routing a proportion of 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15 patients to additional appointments
is equivalent to providing approximately 1, 2, and 3 additional appointments per week of simulated time
respectively.
    The results for Scenario Type A in Table 5 show that providing three additional appointments per week
(routing 15% of demand to additional appointments) reduces the mean waiting time in this queue by 34%
from 108 weeks to 72 weeks. Figure 3 shows that the queue length for orthopedic review after 5 years is
also significantly reduced, from an average of 1603 patients in the baseline scenario to an average of 936
patients. Although this is a promising method of reducing the queue length and waiting time for orthopedic
review, the results show that the increased flow of patients through orthopedic review significantly increase
the queue length and average waiting times for community-based rehabilitation places and surgical review
appointments. In order to successfully clear the backlog of patients waiting for an orthopedic review
appointment, the availability of community-based rehabilitation slots and surgical review appointments
would need to be increased.
    The results for Scenario Type B in Table 5 show that routing 15% of patient demand directly to
community-based rehabilitation successfully reduces the mean waiting time for orthopedic review by 21%
from 108 weeks to 87 weeks. Without increasing the number of community-based rehabilitation slots, this
leads to a sizeable increase in the average waiting time for this service by 41% from 30 to 50 weeks. In
order for this strategy to be successful, the provision of community-based rehabilitation would need to be
increased in line with demand. Future work will consider (i) investigating the number of community-based
rehabilitation resources required to meet the higher level of demand without increasing the average waiting
time, and (ii) a mixture of the Type A and B scenario modeling.
    Table 5: Baseline model results compared to output from Scenario Type A and Scenario Type B.
                  Orthopedic               Community-based        Surgical             Orthopedic
                  review                   rehabilitation         review               surgery
      Baseline    107.9 (104.6,111.2)      4.135 (1.1,7.1)        17.8 (14.9,20.7)     1.2    (0.9,1.5)
      Type A
      0.05        98.1    (95.2,101.1)     10.2    (7.7,12.8)     22.3   (19.2,25.4)   1.56   (1.1,2.1)
      0.10        88.9    (86.1,91.7)      20.1    (17.8,22.4)    36.2   (31.2,41.1)   1.2    (1.0,1.4)
      0.15        71.5    (66.1,76.8)      36.3    (31.2,41.3)    47.6   (42.4,52.7)   1.6    (1.2,2.1)
      Type B
      0.05        98.9    (96.2,101,6)     29.6    (25.3,33.8)    20.0   (17.7,22.4)   1.3    (1.1,1.5)
      0.10        93.5    (89.1,98.0)      47.6    (42.9,52.3)    18.2   (13.6,22.9)   1.4    (1.0,1.7)
      0.15        85.6    (80.6,91.1)      50.4    (53.3,65.2)    20.1   (15.7,24.6)   1.3    (1.0,1.6)

                                                                    Boyle and Mackay




             Average queue length after 5 years


                                                  1500




                                                  1250




                                                  1000




                                                         Baseline     +0.05              +0.10   +0.15
                                                                              Scenario

    Figure 3: Mean and 95% CIs of the orthopedic review queue length after 5 years of simulated time.


5    CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
5.1 Discussion
This paper presents a discrete event simulation model of a public hospital orthopedic service in Australia,
which includes multiple interacting components of the treatment pathway from the point of referral to
surgical intervention. The baseline simulation model was verified and validated as an accurate representation
of the current orthopedic service delivery for patients presenting with knee pain, and the projected pressure
on the system over a five-year time horizon was presented.
     Two types of scenario experiments were proposed to investigate the increase in capacity required to
reduce waiting times for orthopedic review and to clear the current backlog of waiting patients. Results
from the scenario experiments showed that a slight increase in the weekly number of orthopedic review
appointments over a five year period significantly reduces the queue length and mean waiting time for this
service, but leads to an increased waiting time and queue length for other services further downstream. The
results further demonstrated that increasing the provision of community-based rehabilitation services early
in the patient journey reduces the queue length and mean waiting time for orthopedic review, whilst also
increasing the proportion of patients who recover through rehabilitation and therefore do not require surgery.
The use of discrete event simulation to model this problem is advantageous here because interventions to
fix queuing problems in one area of the system can have unintended consequences further downstream. In
this study, such unintended consequences further along the patient pathway were able to be detected and
measured.
     In this research, reusing an existing simulation model of Australian orthopedic services was attempted
and the major barriers to reusing this model were discussed. In this case, model reuse was not feasible

                                                    Boyle and Mackay

and a new model was developed. Throughout the model building process we aimed to make the model
reusable both within the health system under study for other orthopedic services (e.g., the model can be
customized with new data for patients presenting with hip pain), and within other public health systems,
such as in other Australian states or internationally. In order to reduce the friction associated with model
reuse we we undertook a number of steps intended to remove or minimise barriers to re-use (see Section
3.4). It is intended that future studies on simulation modelling for orthopedic waiting lists could re-use this
model. Future work could evaluate the re-usability of this model and discuss any associated challenges.

5.2 Future research
Future scenario modeling will look at (i) implementing multiple interventions simultaneously, (ii) examining
the number of resources required to prevent bottlenecks forming further downstream, (iii) incorporating
costs into the model to advise on the financial implications of each strategy, and (iv) investigating the impact
of COVID-19 on service delivery, which saw a reduced number of referrals during lockdown followed by
a surge in demand. The simulation model will be made available on GitHub along with documentation
and reproducible output for future reuse in other studies.

5.3 Conclusion
In this study, a new discrete event simulation was developed to model an orthopedic treatment pathway in
Australia. The modeling demonstrated how various strategies could be used to reduce the initial waiting
list and highlighted that further interventions would need to be made downstream in the system. It further
showed that the introduction of community-based rehabilitation could reduce pressure on the system while
improving outcomes for patients. The results from scenario experimentation were used to advise the health
service on the expected improvement in queue length and waiting times through various interventions, and
this modeling was used to support a business case for increased resources. This model is reusable and will
be made publicly available with documentation and reproducible output.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The first author would like to acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council Centre of
Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical Frontiers (ACEMS), ARC Grant: CE140100049.

REFERENCES
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2022. “Elective Surgery Activity”. https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/myhospitals/
     intersection/activity/eswt, accessed 17.04.2022.
Banks, J., J. S. Carson, B. L. Nelson, and D. M. Nicol. 2000. Discrete-Event System Simulation. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River,
     New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Baril, C., V. Gascon, and S. Cartier. 2014. “Design and analysis of an outpatient orthopaedic clinic performance with discrete
     event simulation and design of experiments”. Computers & Industrial Engineering 78:285–298.
Bowers, J., G. Mould, and C. Marshall. 2015. “Location of services and the impact on healthcare quality: insights from a
     simulation of a musculoskeletal physiotherapy service”. Journal of the Operational Research Society 66(7):1212–1221.
Boyle, L., A. Marshall, and M. Mackay. 2022. “A framework for developing generalisable discrete event simulation models
     of hospital emergency departments”. European Journal of Operational Research.
Comans, T., A. Chang, L. Standfield, D. Knowles, S. O’Leary, and M. Raymer. 2017. “The development and practical application
     of a simulation model to inform musculoskeletal service delivery in an Australian public health service”. Operations
     Research for Health Care 15:13–18.
Demir, E., M. Gunal, and D. Southern. 2017. “Demand and capacity modelling for acute services using discrete event simulation”.
     Health Systems 6(1):33–40.
Eldabi, T. 2009. “Implementation issues of modeling healthcare problems: misconceptions and lessons”. In Proceedings of the
     2019 Winter Simulation Conference, edited by B. J. A. D. M. D. Rossetti, R. R. Hill and R. G. Ingalls, 1831–1839. IEEE.
Fletcher, A., and D. Worthington. 2009. “What is a ‘generic’hospital model?—a comparison of ‘generic’and ‘specific’hospital
     models of emergency patient flows”. Health Care Management Science 12(4):374–391.

                                                    Boyle and Mackay

Günal, M., and M. Pidd. 2010. “Discrete event simulation for performance modelling in health care: a review of the literature”.
     Journal of Simulation 4(1):42–51.
Ltaif, A., A. Ammar, and L. Khrifch. 2022. “A goal programming approach based on simulation and optimization to serve
     patients in an external orthopedic department”. Journal of Simulation:1–11.
Monks, T., C. Currie, B. Onggo, S. Robinson, M. Kunc, and S. Taylor. 2019. “Strengthening the reporting of empirical
     simulation studies: Introducing the STRESS guidelines”. Journal of Simulation 13(1):55–67.
Robinson, S., R. Nance, R. Paul, M. Pidd, and S. Taylor. 2004. “Simulation model reuse: definitions, benefits and obstacles”.
     Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory 12(7-8):479–494.
Rohleder, T. R., P. Lewkonia, D. P. Bischak, P. Duffy, and R. Hendijani. 2011. “Using simulation modeling to improve patient
     flow at an outpatient orthopedic clinic”. Health Care Management Science 14(2):135–145.
Suhaimi, N., V. Vahdat, and J. C. Griffin. 2018. “Building a Flexible Simulation Model for Modeling Multiple Outpatient
     Orthopedic Clinics”. In Proceedings of the 2018 Winter Simulation Conference, edited by M. Rabe, A. A. Juan, N. Mustafee,
     A. Skoogh, S. Jain, and B. Johansson, 2612–2623: IEEE.
Weerawat, W., J. Pichitlamken, and P. Subsombat. 2014. “A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics
     in a Large Public Hospital”. Journal of Healthcare Engineering 4(2):285–305.

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
LAURA BOYLE is a lecturer of Data Analytics in the Mathematical Sciences Research Centre at Queen’s University Belfast,
N. Ireland. Her research interests are in discrete event simulation modeling with applications in healthcare. Her e-mail address
is laura.boyle@qub.ac.uk.

MARK MACKAY is a director of Complete the Picture Consulting and an Adjunct Professor in Public Health and Tropical
Medicine at James Cook University, Queensland, Australia. His research interests relate to improving decision-making, particu-
larly in health service management, through the use of data and modeling. His email address is mark@completethepicture.com.au.

