See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268508258



A Hybrid Modeling and Simulation Methodology for Formulating Overbooking
Policies

Conference Paper · January 2013



CITATIONS                                                                                                 READS

3                                                                                                         514


6 authors, including:

            Muyuan Li                                                                                                José A. Sepúlveda
            University of Central Florida                                                                            University of Central Florida
            2 PUBLICATIONS 11 CITATIONS                                                                              57 PUBLICATIONS 555 CITATIONS

              SEE PROFILE                                                                                                 SEE PROFILE



            Ali Bozorgi                                                                                              Waldemar Karwowski
            The University of Sydney                                                                                 University of Central Florida
            17 PUBLICATIONS 311 CITATIONS                                                                            580 PUBLICATIONS 12,245 CITATIONS

              SEE PROFILE                                                                                                 SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Ali Bozorgi on 30 August 2015.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Proceedings of the 2013 Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference
A. Krishnamurthy and W.K.V. Chan, eds.

  A Hybrid Modeling and Simulation Methodology for Formulating
                      Overbooking Policies
                                                  Yiling He
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                                 Muyuan Li
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                           Serge Sala-Diakanda
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                              Jose Sepulveda
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                                 Ali Bozorgi
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                          Waldemar Karwowski
                                        University of Central Florida
                                             Orlando, Florida

                                                     Abstract

System dynamics modeling and discrete-event simulation have been applied in the health care industry in system
improvement initiatives. Although each has its strengths and weaknesses, few studies have demonstrated how these
two approaches could be brought together to improve the quality of health delivery. In this paper, a feedback-based
hybrid modeling and simulation methodology has been developed, one that uses a system dynamics model for policy
making and a discrete-event model for day-to-day clinic operations. This method is applied to support the
formulation of overbooking policies in an Orthopedic clinic to achieve the strategic goal of a maximum appointment
delay of 30 days. First, the system dynamics model is run to identify the best overall overbooking policy, which is
then fed into the discrete-even model to evaluate its impact on day-to-day operations in terms of the patients’ time in
system. In this way, the policies developed by this hybrid modeling and simulation method address both the strategic
(long-term) as well operational (short-term) goals of a clinic. Additionally, the approach also demonstrates that
though overbooking is a commonly practiced to mitigate the negative effects of no-shows, it also can be an effective
intervention strategy to reduce appointment delays.

Keywords
Overbooking, Appointment Schedule, Discrete-Event Simulation, System dynamics modeling

1. Introduction
Studies have shown that the U.S. health care delivery system is poorly prepared to meet the growing demands of its
population [1]. Access to health services is increasingly difficult as evidenced by long wait time, also known as

                             He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski

appointment delay. In addition, high rates of patients’ no-shows result in significant waste of already rare resources
in clinics [2]. Both of these issues however, are not unrelated. Indeed, researchers have found that a somewhat linear
relationship does exist between appointment delay and no-shows [3]. Therefore, effective intervention strategies
aimed at decreasing appointment delays will also decrease no-shows, thereby enhancing health care delivery. As
such, appointment delay may be regarded as a performance measure to assess the quality of health care delivery
systems.

In Veterans Administration Medical Centers (VAMCs), appointment delay is a critical performance measure. A
closely related and probably more recognizable measure within VAMC’s is the percentage of patients seen within
30 days of their appointment requests. However, interviews and data analysis performed during the course of this
project has revealed that this threshold is rarely met for most patients. Indeed, delays of 3 months or more are not
uncommon. The primary reasons cited is insufficient capacity (i.e. providers and nurses) given the volume of both
new and established patients. However, time studies performed at the site in some of the specialty clinics have
shown that while clinic capacity is defined in terms fixed appointment slots size (e.g. 40 minutes for new patients in
Orthopedics), most providers rarely use more than half the time of those slots with patients.

In this paper, the practice of overbooking has been studied in light of the apparent availability of additional capacity.
Specifically, the objective is to quantify the potential impact of an overbooking policy, not only from a strategic and
long term point of view, but also from an operational and short term one. Indeed, while it is expected that some
overall overbooking rates may allow the clinic to achieve the aforementioned appointment delay goal, those same
rates may potentially, when the right conditions are present, threaten operational performance, particularly in terms
of patients’ total time in system. The total time in the system of a patient may increase dramatically, thereby
resulting in patients’ dissatisfaction. It results therefore that overbooking rates that are promising from a strategic
standpoint may not necessarily be appropriate for clinic day-to-day operations. Therefore, it is necessary to consider
overbooking policies formulating both strategically and operationally. This paper has discussed the hybrid modeling
and simulation methodology – composed of a systems dynamics model on one hand, and a discrete-event model on
the other – which was developed to help formulate overbooking policies. An Orthopedic specialty clinic has been
used as an example to demonstrate this methodology.

First, a review of the literature is presented. Section 3 then describes the methodology. In section 4, the hybrid
methodology is applied in a real world example, an Orthopedics specialty clinic in a VAMC, to illustrate how a
practical overbooking policy may be formulated.

2. Literature Review
The application of systems engineering tools to improve health care delivery system has been advocated,
particularly in the joint report from the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and Institute of Medicine (IOM)
[4]. Systems engineering focuses on the design, control and orchestration of system activities to meet performance
objectives [5]. System modeling and simulation methodologies in particular have been successfully in a wide variety
of applications, both in and outside of the healthcare field.

Indeed, system dynamics modeling has been recognized as an appropriate method for improving healthcare
management, and therefore used in various healthcare settings to explore strategies or policies [6]. Moreover,
researchers argue that the strategic perspective offered by the system dynamics approach and its emphasis on the
interactions between processes facilities the study of health care systems [7]. On the other than, discrete-event
simulation has proven particularly useful as an analysis and improvement tool to assist operational decision makings
in healthcare settings as they are often plagued by complexities and uncertainties [8]. Discrete-event simulation,
system operations can be represented by a set of states, with transitions among states occurring when certain events
take place, often in a probabilistic manner [9].

Research abounds on the applications of both modeling and simulation paradigms in healthcare. However, little has
been published in regards to harnessing the benefits that a hybrid modeling approach could provide to resolve issues
in a complex environment. One of the exceptions however, is Rohleder et al. who used discrete-event simulation to
support new facility design and then a system dynamics model to help predict implementation problems of new
design [10]. Nevertheless, while they applied both types of simulation to the same problem, a feedback of
information between these two worlds was never discussed.

                            He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski

3. Methodology
This study was conducted in an Orthopedic clinic that provided health care services for three types of patients: new
patients, regular established patients and ambulatory surgery patients. After their first visits, new patients might be
sent to either ambulatory surgery or back to the regular clinic for established follow-ups. Upon completion of
ambulatory surgeries, patients were sent back to the regular clinic for subsequent follow-ups. Since ambulatory
surgery patients were operated in an operating area that is separated from the Orthopedic clinic, we only focused on
the regular clinic services for new patients and established patients in this study. Nevertheless, the provider’s
absence from the clinic when performing surgery was accounted for in the resource availability component of the
models.

In this study, each overbooking policy was evaluated from two perspectives. From a strategic standpoint, they were
evaluated with respect to their ability to achieve the strategic goal of reducing appointment delays to maximum of
30 days. From an operational standpoint, they were evaluated with respect to the time patients would be expected to
spend within the clinic on any particular day. This latter evaluation was performed by first assessing the feasibility
of the allocation of the overbooking capacity to the different types of patients. The system dynamics model focused
on the strategic factors that impacted the overbooking policy and the relationships between them. The discrete-event
model focused on the clinic operational processes. Through the system dynamics model, an overall overbooking rate
that made the model achieve the strategic goal (maximum 30 days of appointment delay) was obtained; as well as
such overbooking capacity was allocated between different types of patients. Then, this overbooking rate and
allocation policies were implemented in the discrete-event model to investigate the expected operational
performance of the clinic. The operational performance measurement being used in this study was the patients’ total
time in system. A total time in system that did not exceed 30 minutes plus the time spent with the provider was set
as a performance goal.

3.1 System Dynamics model
First, a system dynamics model was used to study the impact of various overall overbooking rates on appointment
delay. The system dynamics model distinguished two types of patients, new patients and established patients by
building a scheduling system for each type of patients. A meta-model represented the generic scheduling process, as
shown in Figure 1. The input rate of patient’s backlog was generated by the number of appointment requests per
month; while the output rate was regulated by the number of requests getting scheduled per month. Given the
strategic goal of appointment delay, the monthly demand of patients was determined by the total number of patients
in backlog divided by the maximum appointment delay. Then the available capacities were determined by both
monthly demands of patients and overbooking rate. This logic was developed for both new patients and established
patients and integrated into a single model where clinic capacities were shared. The result of this logic was an
essentially balancing loop that constantly sought to bring the system to the desired strategic goal.

The capacities were distributed between new patients and established patients based on their monthly demand. For
instance, if the demand of established patients in one month was four times as much as new patients, system
dynamics model would distribute one fifth of capacities to new patients, and the rest to established patients. For this
model, capacity allocation was only determined by the ratio of monthly demands of established patients over those
of new patients, and would adjust dynamically with varying monthly demands to achieve the long term strategic
goal. In this way, the capacity allocation policies might change within a certain range. However, some margin
values within those ranges may cause clinic to miss their time in system performance goal. For example, if the
system distributed too many overbooked capacities to established patients, increasing number of established patients
would be scheduled at the same time. Then with the number of arrival patients increasing dramatically, both
established patients and new patients would have long in-clinic waiting time for their appointments. In order to
investigate these potential risks, a discrete-event model was built and used to evaluate the overbooking policy
proposed by the systems dynamics model.

                                                He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski




                                                           Figure 1: Meta-Model of Scheduling System

3.2 Discrete-Event Model
In Orthopedic clinic, there were three providers, two nurses and three exam rooms. Furthermore, new patients had
40 minutes appointment time slot and established patients have 20 minutes appointments time slot. The discrete
model was developed in Flexsim Healthcare®, and used data from internal reports and from a time study that was
performed by the research team. The patient flow was shown in Figure 2, and patient track implemented in Flexsim
Healthcare was shown in Figure 3.

     ORTHO

                             PT/PCP                    Clerks                                  Nurses                     Provider         Comments

                                                                                                                       When provider is
                            PT arrives for            Clerks print PT                         Nurse gathers PT        ready, Nurse calls
                              scheduled              “router” and slip                        routers from front       PT and brings to
                             appointment             in folder with ID                        desk and puts on        schedule providers
                            and checks-in                   card                                providers door        room and confirms
                                                                                                                            social
     Check-In




                                                                         PT will be seen


                                                      Clerks inform
                             PT walks-in
                                                       nurse of PT                          Nurse/Provider decide
                             and goes to
                                                      condition and                          if PT must be seen
                              front desk
                                                      circumstance



                                                                                             PT will not be seen
     Provider Encounter




                                                                                                                      Provider encounter




                            PT sent out for                                                                            Does PT need
                           additional x-rays/                  PT needs additional x-rays/tests                       additional x-rays/
                                  test                                                                                       tests
     PT Check-out




                          PT Leaves system                                 PT does not need additional x-rays/tests




                                                        Figure 2: Patient Flow of Orthopedic Clinic

                            He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski




                   Figure 3: Flexsim Healthcare Patient Track for Orthopedic Established Patient

The model generated patients based on hourly arrival rates obtained from scheduling records. The process times (i.e.
check-in, nurse screening, consulting, and check-out) used by the model were the distributions fitted with data from
the time study. Data analysis showed that the average no-show rate of Orthopedics is 7.4% for established patients
and there was no significant difference between providers in terms of their process time. It was assumed however
that new patients would show up for their appointment. Overbooking was implemented by increasing the hourly
arrival rates of two types of patients, according to the capacity allocation ratio provided by system dynamics model.
For instance, if the overall overbooking rate was 50% of initial clinic capacities and system dynamics model
distributed one fourth of capacities to new patients and the rest to established patients, the number of new patients
generated would be increased by 10% of initial number in base model, and 40% for established patients.

3.3 A Hybrid Modeling and Simulation Methodology
The mechanism of this hybrid methodology was to involve operational constraints or feedbacks from the discrete-
event simulation back to the system dynamics model to enhance strategic decision-making capability. This was
captured conceptually in Figure 4. The policies proposed by the system dynamics model, including overall
overbooking rate and corresponding capacity allocations, were implemented in the discrete-event model to
investigate their operational merits. If patients’ time in system was unacceptable of one certain policy, then a
constraint would be send back to system dynamics model so that a better policy could be found. Conceptually, this
feedback loop would be travelled until a satisfactory policy from both a strategic and operational perspective was
found.


                                            Overbooking Policy
                 System Dynamics                                                 Discrete Simulation
                                            · Overall Overbooking Rate
                      Model                                                            Model
                                            · Capacity Allocation




                                                                       No         In-Clinic Waiting
                                                    Constraints
                                                                                  Time Acceptable


                         Figure 4: Mechanism of Hybrid Modeling and Simulation Method

                            He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski

4. Results
Based on our time study, we found that the average consulting time that the providers spend with patient was about
21minutes for new patients and 11minutes for established patients, which were both much smaller than the slot size,
40 minutes for new patients and 20 minutes for established patients. Thus, it was reasonable, at least in theory to
investigate high overbooking rates, even up to 100%. Therefore, several simulation experiments were performed, in
which the overbooking rate varied from 10% to 100% in increment of 10%. In addition, an additional scenario was
investigated in which the overbooking rate was chosen to match the average no show rate of 7.4%. This was a
common practice in veterans’ medical centers, as it mitigated the negative effect of no shows on the utilization of
resources. Furthermore, as stated earlier, a strategic appointment delay goal of 30 days was adopted.

The outcome of these experiments was summarized in the boxplot shown in Figure 5. It was evident that the
common approach to overbooking by the average no-show rates did not result in significant improvement in
appointment delay performance. In other hand, this practice was largely ineffective with respect to patients’
experience. The results also indicated that in this clinic, overbooking rates of 80% or higher were necessary to
achieve the appointment delay goal of 30 days. In fact, with a 90% overbooking rate, 75% of the patients in the
Orthopedic clinic would be seen by their providers within 30 days of their appointment request date. In addition one
could observe that the variability in appointment delay decreased dramatically as the overbooking rate increased.
Therefore, in theory, overbooking could be a very powerful strategy toward maintaining consistency in the
performance of the clinic.




                           Figure 5: Appointment Delay of Different Overbooking Rates

However, what remained to be established was whether such high overbooking rates could be implemented in day to
day operations. The discrete-event simulation model discussed in section 3.2 was used for that purpose, considering
an overbooking rate of 90%. The allocation of this overbooking rate between new and established was determined.
This was achieved by first using the systems dynamics model outputs in order to calculate the ratios of monthly
demands of established patients by monthly demands of new patients were generated by system dynamics model. As
shown in Figure 6, these ratios ranged from 3 to 26, with an average of 10. As the distribution of the overbooking
capacity between new and established patients’ changed constantly over time in the system dynamics model, five
allocation points were identified and retained for the discrete-event model: the minimum, first quartile, median, third
quartile, and maximum. This information was summarized in Table 1.

                                         He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski


                        60                                                                                   100.00%
                                                                                                             90.00%
                        50
                                                                                                             80.00%




                                                                                                                       Cumulative Frequency
                                                                                                             70.00%
            Frequency

                        40
                                                                                                             60.00%
                        30                                                                                   50.00%
                                                                                                             40.00%
                        20
                                                                                                             30.00%
                                                                                                             20.00%
                        10
                                                                                                             10.00%
                         0                                                                                   0.00%
                             3   4   5   6   7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
                                     Ratios of Monthly Established Demands to Monthly New Patients Demands



       Figure 6: Frequencies of Ratios of Monthly Established Demands to Monthly New Patients Demands

                                                      Table 1: Overbooked Capacity Allocation

                                        Ratio of
                                                                     New Patients           Established Patients              Total
                                 Established over New
      Minimum                              3                            22.5%                      67.5%                         90%
      1st Quartile                           6                           13%                        77%                          90%
      Mean                                   10                           9%                        81%                          90%
       rd
      3 Quartile                             12                           7%                        83%                          90%
      Maximum                                26                           4%                        86%                          90%

The overbooking rates above were implemented by increasing hourly arrival rates of new patients and established
patients respectively in discrete-event model. We assumed that overbooking was distributed evenly per hour, since it
was assumed that there was no significant difference between providers. After running the discrete-event simulation
model, the patients’ total time in system were analyzed as shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8. These boxplots compared
the patients’ total time in system for different monthly demand ratios.




                                                      Figure 7: Time in System of New Patients

                             He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski




                                   Figure 8: Time in System of Established Patients


5. Discussion
According to Figure 7 and Figure 8, for baseline, the average time in system is about 67 minutes of new patients
(additional 27 minutes besides consulting) and 44 minutes (additional 22 minutes besides consulting) of established
patients, which are both acceptable based on our assumption (additional 30 minutes besides consulting). In general,
patients’ total time in system will increase with overbooking; the average time in system in overbooking situation is
longer than that of baseline. Furthermore, it is observed that average time in system fluctuates for both types of
patients with different allocation policies (ratios of established patients’ demand to new patients’ demand).

When the ratio is 3 and the overbooking rate of new patients is 32.5%, system generates extra new patients that
clinic cannot “consume” within acceptable time period; also with those “redundant” new patients, established
patients have to wait for longer time, even over two hours in system as outliners in Figure 8. The situation is similar
with the ratio of 6. These two situations illustrate that in these two allocation policies, system allocates excessive
capacities to new patients and then results in long time in system and large variability, which decreases patients’
satisfaction.

On the other hand, when the ratio is 26 and the overbooking rate of established patients is 86%, system generates
extra established patients that exceeds the capabilities of clinic; and it results long time in system of both types of
patients. According to the time in system of established patients, the variability increases dramatically with those
outliners in Figure 8. Similarity, when the ratio is 12, the average patients’ time in system and variability increases.
These situations illustrate that with these two allocation policies, system allocates excessive capacities to established
patients and then results in long time in system and large variability, which decrease patients’ satisfaction. However,
clinic rarely as outliners in allocation policy of ratio of 12; then it indicates that this policy actually decrease the
variability comparing to that with ratio of 6.

When the ratio is 10 and the overbooking rate of new patients is 9% (81% of established patients), patients’ time in
system stays at the same level as baseline, in general. The fact that there is no significant increase in variability
means that the system’s performance is expected to be consistent. The allocation policy may therefore be seen as
appropriate for clinic operations.

Since system dynamics model adjusts the capacity depending on the monthly demands of patients dynamically, it is
highly possible that clinic will use the ratios that may increase time in system and results patients’ dissatisfaction of
clinic operational performance. Therefore, in order to maintain operations in clinic, ratio of allocating capacity of
established patients to new patients should not fall all out of the range of 6 to 12. This range should be feedback to
system dynamics so that the best overbooking policy within that as a constraint may be found to improve current
model. In this way, the policies made by this feedback-based hybrid method consider not only the strategic goals,
but also the practical operations in clinic.

                                                He, Li, Sala-Diakanda, Sepulveda, Bozorgi, and Karwowski

            6. Conclusion
            Both system dynamics modeling and discrete-event simulation have found numerous applications in healthcare
            settings. However, much remains to be done to effectively harness each of these paradigms’ strengths by combining
            them to address a single problem space. Through a case study, this paper attempted to demonstrate how harnessing
            those strengths could be achieved. Though overbooking is a widely used in practice to eliminate the negative effects
            of no-shows, it can also be used as an effective intervention strategy to reduce appointment delay. In this paper, an
            overbooking policy formulation problem was used to demonstrate how a feedback-based hybrid modeling and
            simulation method could work to improve both short and long term performance. The paper demonstrates how
            overbooking policies suggested a system dynamics model that is focused on the long term may be evaluated for day-
            to-day performance in the clinic using a discrete-event model. The analysis shows that not all policies that work for
            long term are good for the short term, and demonstrated how the discrete event model can impose policy constraints
            given a set operational performance goal such as the patients’ total time in system. Such constraint should be fed
            back to the systems dynamics model such as an acceptable compromise may be reached.

            Acknowledge
            This research was funded by Veterans Administration Medical Center. Acknowledgments are due to the outstanding
            Orlando Veteran’s Affair Medical Center leadership team support.

            Reference
                         1.  Ishida, Y., 2000, “Deficiencies in US Medical Care,” The Journal of the American Medical Association,
                             284(17), 2184-2185.
                         2. Giachetti, R., 2008, “A simulation study of interventions to reduce appointment lead-time and patient no-
                             show rate,” Proc. of the Winter Simulation Conference, December 7-10, Miami, Florida, 1463-1468.
                         3. Gallucci, G., Swartz, W., Hackerman, F., 2005, “Impact of the wait for an initial appointment on the rate of
                             kept appointments at a mental health center,” Psychiatric Services, 56(3), 344-347.
                         4. Proctor, P., Compton, W., Grossman, J., and Fanjiang, G., 2005, “Building a Better Delivery System: A
                             New Engineering,” Health Care Partnership.
                         5. Kopach-Konrad, R., Lawley, M., Criswell, M., Hasan, I., Chakraborty, S., Pekny, J., and Doebbeling, B. N.,
                             2007, “Applying systems engineering principles in improving health care delivery,” Journal of general
                             internal medicine, 22, 431-437.
                         6. Young, T., 2005, “An agenda for healthcare and information simulation,” Health care management science,
                             8(3), 189-196.
                         7. Taylor, K., and Lane, D., 1998, “Simulation applied to health services: opportunities for applying the
                             system dynamics approach,” Journal of health services research & policy, 3(4), 226.
                         8. Rohleder, T., Lewkonia, P., Bischak, D., Duffy, P., and Hendijani, R., 2011, “Using simulation modeling to
                             improve patient flow at an outpatient orthopedic clinic,” Health Care Management Science, 14(2), 135-145.
                         9. Banks, J., Carson, J. S., and Nelson, B., 2009, Discrete-event system simulation, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall,
                             New Jersey.
                         10. Rohleder, T., Bischak, D., and Baskin, L., 2007, “Modeling patient service centers with simulation and
                             system dynamics,” Health care management science, 10(1), 1-12.




View publication stats

