ORE Open Research Exeter




TITLE
Streamlining pathways for minor injuries in emergency departments through radiographer-led
discharge


AUTHORS
Rachuba, S; Knapp, K; Ashton, L; et al.


JOURNAL
Operations Research for Health Care


DEPOSITED IN ORE
20 June 2018




              This version available at

              http://hdl.handle.net/10871/33260




COPYRIGHT AND REUSE
Open Research Exeter makes this work available in accordance with publisher policies.


A NOTE ON VERSIONS
The version presented here may diﬀer from the published version. If citing, you are advised to consult the published version for pagination, volume/issue and date of
publication

Manuscript Details
Manuscript number                   ORHC_2017_50_R1

Title                               Streamlining pathways for minor injuries in Emergency Departments through
                                    radiographer-led discharge

Article type                        Original Article

Abstract
Diagnostic imaging services are essential to the diagnosis pathway for many patients arriving at hospital emergency
departments with a suspected fracture. Commonly, these patients need to be seen again by a doctor or emergency
nurse practitioner after an X-Ray image has been taken in order finalise the diagnosis and determine the next stage in
the patients' pathway. Here, significant waiting times can accrue for these follow-up consultations after radiographic
imaging although the vast majority of patients are discharged. Research evidence from pilot studies suggests that
patients with minor appendicular injuries could be safely discharged by a suitably qualified radiographer directly after
imaging thereby avoiding queues for repeated consultation. In this study, we model patient pathways through an
emergency department (ED) at a hospital in the South West of England using process mapping, interviews with ED
staff and discrete event simulation (DES). The DES model allowed us to compare the current practice at the hospital
with scenarios using radiographer-led discharge of patients directly after imaging and assess the reduction in patients'
length of stay in ED. We also quantified trade-offs between the provision of radiographer-led discharge and its effects,
i.e. reduction in waiting times and ED workload. Finally, we discuss how this decision support tool can be used to
support understanding for patients and members of staff.

Keywords                            Emergency department; early discharge; discrete event simulation; case study

Manuscript region of origin         Europe

Corresponding Author                Sebastian Rachuba

Corresponding Author's              NIHR CLAHRC Southwest Peninsula
Institution

Order of Authors                    Sebastian Rachuba, Karen Knapp, Lucy Ashton, Martin Pitt


Submission Files Included in this PDF
File Name [File Type]
ORHC_2017_50_Rachuba et al_Response to reviewers.pdf [Response to Reviewers]

2017_rachuba_rld_v4.0.pdf [Manuscript File]


Submission Files Not Included in this PDF
File Name [File Type]
LaTeX source files.zip [LaTeX Source File]

To view all the submission files, including those not included in the PDF, click on the manuscript title on your EVISE
Homepage, then click 'Download zip file'.

Response to reviewers                                                                                                                                  14 November 2017
ORHC_2017_50


We are grateful for the reviewer’s constructive and focused feedback on our paper. This has helped to increase the flow of the paper and we believe that the
content of the paper is now readily accessible for its readers. We have revised the paper accordingly and addressed all comments separately in the table below.
On behalf of the authors
Sebastian Rachuba


Reviewer 1
The authors are focused on evaluating the diagnosis pathway for patients with minor injuries in emergency departments (ED). In particular, the aim is to
evaluate the impact of radiographer-led discharge under such circumstances and its impact in lengths of stay in ED, waiting times and ED workload. For this
analysis, the authors propose to model patient pathways through an ED at a hospital in the South West of England using process mapping, interviews with ED
staff and discrete event simulation.
Overall, the article presents an interesting and relevant topic, and is well written. Also, the proposed tool shows clear potential for use in real practice.
Nevertheless, I have several comments that should be addressed by the authors before publication.

  Section               Comment                                                                    Response

  Comment 1,            More details are required on each stage of the proposed methodology        Thanks for this comment. In line with the second reviewer’s
  section 2.4           in Section 2.4. For instance, which was the key information gathered       comment, we have extended the information given in the
                        in semi-structured interviews? How did the authors select the              methodology section. Since we also restructured the sections in
                        stakeholders to be involved in the study?                                  order to do better justice to the overall modelling approach, this
                                                                                                   is now part of chapter 3, section 3.2.

  Comment 2,            Regarding the last issue referred in Comment #1 (selection of              Thanks for this remark. We did not use specific techniques such
  section 2.4           stakeholders), this turns to be a critical point for the study, since      as CATWOE in our study. In fact, the stakeholders to be involved
                        different stakeholders with different concerns can be identified, and      and the resulting KPIs were made clear by hospital staff
                        so a wide variety of KPIs may arise depending on the stakeholders          (clinicians and managers) and hence the focus was
                        involved. Within problem structuring methods, CATWOE analysis may          predetermined.
                        be a good option to identify different groups of stakeholders, so as to
                        justify which ones were included in the study, and finally, why specific
                        KPIs were considered as the most relevant for the analysis.




Sebastian Rachuba                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 5

Response to reviewers                                                                                                                                 14 November 2017
ORHC_2017_50


  Chapter 3             Chapter 3 could be improved if organized according to the three            This is very helpful indeed, thanks. We have restructured the
                        methodological steps identified in Section 2.4.                            entire modelling process by reorganising the previous sections 3
                                                                                                   and 4. We believe that this improves the flow of the paper and
                                                                                                   makes it easier to follow.

  Page 6, lines         Is this true at a national level? Otherwise, how can one argue that this   The sentence has been reworded and now reads “In this study,
  211-212               study and the proposed tool can be applied to other hospitals at a         very few patients received ultrasound, CT or MRI scans as part
                        national level?                                                            of their diagnosis. This is standard for minor injury pathways
                                                                                                   because the majority of injuries presenting within this stream of
                                                                                                   patients are readily diagnosed using radiographs alone. A
                                                                                                   minority of patients may have other imaging if their presenting
                                                                                                   symptoms are complex or they deteriorate during their time in
                                                                                                   the hospital.”

  Figure 3, page 9      Identifying pathways A and B in Figure 3 would greatly improve its         We have adapted the formatting for the arrows according to
                        interpretation.                                                            figure 2 and this makes figure 3 easier to follow.

  Section 3.5           A paragraph in Section 3.5 showing how to read Figure 4 would be           As part of the new section 3, we have included a paragraph
                        useful to better understand all the flows and information shown in         explaining the graphical interface of the DES model.
                        the figure.

  Section 3.5 / 4       How did the authors model the impact of highly skilled radiographers?      The assumptions for the pathway redesign were added. The
                        According to Section 3.5, historical data was used to model ‘regular’      idea was to have a short ‘consultation’ following image
                        discharges, but nothing is said regarding discharges by highly skilled     acquisition. We assumed durations to be around 5 to 10
                        radiographers (with this being expected to have impact on the              minutes. This is now part of the section ‘Pathway redesign’ in
                        number of discharges used as KPI). What did the authors assume for         section 3.
                        this particular situation?

  Section 4             Differences between genders are referred in Chapter 4. Did the             We have added a sentence indicating that we did not test for
                        authors consider using probability distributions from historical data to   differences, but the model could easily incorporate this for
                        capture the differences between male and female? Did the authors           further analysis.
                        test it to verify if no significant differences arise in final results?




Sebastian Rachuba                                                                                                                                            Page 2 of 5

Response to reviewers                                                                                                                                14 November 2017
ORHC_2017_50

Reviewer 2
This is an application paper of simulation modelling in health and it is contributing to the literature on emergency departments (A&E in UK). I like the focus of
the paper on simulating the impact of upskilling radiographers to undertake duties that are traditionally associated with other ED professionals. The
engagement with real healthcare professionals and the use of good quality data in good supply is a strength. However I feel that the paper is not well enough
structured and this is not doing justice to the worked undertaken. The information for the most part is there but it needs reorganising. In addition you are not
using the available literature particularly in DES enough in sections such as the description of the methodology and the discussion section.
We appreciate this feedback and in particular the suggested ideas for restructuring the paper. We have carefully revised our first version of this study and
specifically paid attention to strong logical connections in the case study section. We believe that the revised version does more justice to our work and that is is
easier to follow. However, as these suggestions imposed quite substantial changes to the work we presented, we paid careful attention to the fact that this is an
interdisciplinary work and as such should contain sufficient amount of background on the medical application of interest. We think that this revision
incorporates both, i.e. provides a clearer structure of the overall study and still focuses strongly on the medical application and exemplifies the use of this
research.

  Section                         Comment                                                            Response

  1. Introduction                 The introduction is missing the contribution which is found        Thanks, we have brought the contributions forward to the
                                  on page 5 (first paragraph only). The research questions are       Introduction. At the same time, the research questions have
                                  not needed here.                                                   been integrated in the modelling objectives where we
                                                                                                     believe, they fit best.

  The general structure I         I would start with the literature on ED and upskilling medical     Thanks for this comment. We have moved the contribution
  would suggest is:               staff to cope with increasing demand (think beyond                 to the front (see above). We do believe that our literature
                                  radiographers to nurses), then simulation of ED and lastly         section follows a structure which is very similar to the one
  2. Background                   literature specific to simulating radiology within ED if any. It   you suggested. However, we do not think that including the
                                  will then be clear to the reader how your work is positioned       literature on upskilling staff in ED in general would add much
                                  and the novelty of your focus within the ED simulation             but would rather distract from the studies focus, i.e.
                                  literature.                                                        upskilling radiographers. Even with the current structure, we
                                                                                                     believe that the novelty of this approach becomes clear.

  3 Case study                    This section could be divided into:                                We appreciate the suggested structure and have revised this
                                                                                                     section of the paper accordingly. Where necessary, we have




Sebastian Rachuba                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5

Response to reviewers                                                                                                                          14 November 2017
ORHC_2017_50

                                                                                              made minor amendments in some places which will be
                                                                                              highlighted explicitly.

  3.1 Description of the ED   Explain your involvement, motivation, project partners,         We have expanded this part and named collaborators and
                              contributors from hospital, timeline, problem in that setting   highlighted the project motivation.
                              etc

  3.2 Methodology             Explain the choice of DES, DES software, and outline process    The section ‘Methodology’ has been revised. It now features
                              followed (Consider Conceptual modelling, model coding and       the suggested aspects and we feel that it links well with the
                              V&V, experimentation and implementation.                        following subsections.

  3.3 CM                      Understanding the problem, simulation objectives, inputs,       We have included all the major topics you mentioned. In
                              outputs, model content and data requirements                    addition, we have included the data analysis as a separate
                                                                                              subsection following 3.3 because we believe the quality of
                                                                                              the data is so good that it should have a prominent place in
                                                                                              the modelling process.

  3.4 Model coding            How you represented the data in the model,                      We have explained the DES model in a lot more detail. Given
                              KPIs/parameters, calibration of the model (justify run time     the additionally introduced subsection on data analysis, we
                              and warm up) and V&V                                            have add KPIs and key parameters to that section. Given the
                                                                                              applied nature of this work, it appeared quite natural to link
                                                                                              the data with the KPIs.

  3.5 Experimentation         Outline the scenarios and how these were determined or if       Thanks, we have revised accordingly. In particular, we have
                              necessary the design of the experiments                         brought forward the description of the scenarios, which were
                                                                                              initially part of the results section. After consolidating these
                                                                                              descriptions, we believe it now reads clearer and is easy to
                                                                                              follow.

  4. Results                  explain the findings of the scenarios outlined                  We kept most of this part, but excluded the scenario
                                                                                              descriptions (see previous comment).




Sebastian Rachuba                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 5

Response to reviewers                                                                                                                            14 November 2017
ORHC_2017_50


  5. Discussion / conclusion     discuss implementation, contribution and reflect on the          In addition to the critical reflection on challenges when
                                 literature given your findings, propose subsequent work          implementing radiographer-led discharge, we have
                                                                                                  expanded the last paragraph linking our findings with the
                                                                                                  literature and proposed next steps.

I hope this does not discourage you but a better structure will help the reader fully appreciate what you are putting forward.




Sebastian Rachuba                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 5

            Streamlining pathways for minor injuries in Emergency Departments
                            through radiographer-led discharge

                      Sebastian Rachubaa,c,∗, Karen Knappb , Lucy Ashtonb , Martin Pittb,c
                          a
                              University of Wuppertal, Schumpeter School of Business and Economics
                                                b
                                                  University of Exeter Medical School
                                             c
                                               NIHR CLAHRC South West Peninsula




     Abstract
     Diagnostic imaging services are essential to the diagnosis pathway for many patients arriving at
     hospital emergency departments with a suspected fracture. Commonly, these patients need to be
     seen again by a doctor or emergency nurse practitioner after an X-Ray image has been taken in
     order finalise the diagnosis and determine the next stage in the patients’ pathway. Here, significant
     waiting times can accrue for these follow-up consultations after radiographic imaging although
     the vast majority of patients are discharged. Research evidence from pilot studies suggests that
     patients with minor appendicular injuries could be safely discharged by a suitably qualified radio-
     grapher directly after imaging thereby avoiding queues for repeated consultation. In this study, we
     model patient pathways through an emergency department (ED) at a hospital in the South West
     of England using process mapping, interviews with ED staff and discrete event simulation (DES).
     The DES model allowed us to compare the current practice at the hospital with scenarios using
     radiographer-led discharge of patients directly after imaging and assess the reduction in patients’
     length of stay in ED. We also quantified trade-offs between the provision of radiographer-led dis-
     charge and its effects, i.e. reduction in waiting times and ED workload. Finally, we discuss how
     this decision support tool can be used to support understanding for patients and members of staff.
     Keywords: Emergency department, early discharge, discrete event simulation, case study



 1   1. Introduction

 2       The increasing demands on emergency departments (ED) in the United Kingdom (UK) are
 3   putting pressure on acute trusts and their staff, with some reports describing the pressures placed
 4   on staff and hospitals as being unsustainable [1]. Waiting times in EDs have increased and patients
 5   are being encouraged to use these services mindfully to try to reduce the pressure, with staff
 6   and resources frequently being stretched beyond capacity [2]. However, hospitals also need to
 7   assess the most appropriate methods for utilising staff effectively and streamlining the patient
 8   pathways to improve productivity. The current minor injuries (MI) pathway in ED is generally led
 9   by emergency-nurse practitioners (ENP), with additional medical support as necessary. Usually,
10   around 60% of ED attendances require medical imaging, which is usually projection radiography
11   (X-Ray). These images are most commonly interpreted within the ED by either junior doctors or

       ∗
           Corresponding author: rachuba@uni-wuppertal.de

     Preprint submitted to Operations Research for Health Care                                       November 15, 2017

12   ENPs who decide on and perform treatment or discharge based on the image. A formal report is
13   later issued by a reporting radiographer or radiologist and The National Institute for Health and
14   Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines for fracture recommend that this is now completed prior to
15   the patient leaving ED [3]. However, the vast majority of patients requiring medical imaging will
16   subsequently be discharged from ED. Those discharges sometimes include a referral to a patient’s
17   General Practitioner (GP) or other services such as Fracture Clinic or physiotherapy. Patients who
18   are discharged following imaging can spend up to 50% of their time in ED waiting for a decision
19   to be made after an image has been taken.
20       This paper combines evidence-based research looking at the benefits of radiographer-led dis-
21   charge with operational research techniques and Discrete Event Simulation (DES) in particular.
22   We build on existing studies but focus specifically on patients with minor injuries and suspected
23   fractures. Most of these patients are likely to be discharged from ED and do not require any
24   further treatment in the hospital. Secondly, we explicitly assess the trade-off between quality im-
25   provements (i.e. time savings) and the related cost for which we use staffing time as a proxy. The
26   DES model we develop provides a decision support tool to help quantify the impact of redesigning
27   the minor injuries pathway in ED. It enables clinicians and hospital managers to identify benefits
28   and drawbacks of such a pathway redesign. As the pathway we investigate is very generic, there are
29   clear opportunities to transfer these findings to other care providers such as large academic hospi-
30   tals, smaller district general hospitals, or MIUs. To summarise, our paper addresses the following
31   three key aspects:

32     1. Model evidence-based changes to an existing ED pathway
33        The DES model serves as a safe environment and allows clinicians and managers to explore
34        the impact of pathway changes and identify required changes to resource availabilities.
35     2. Provide a DES model as a decision support tool
36        Although driven from a single trust’s point of view, the model captures the common overall
37        structure of a minor injuries pathway in ED. The DES model is designed to be possibly
38        adapted by other hospitals. This allows the use of other trust’s historic or expert data to
39        perform similar analyses to the ones conducted in this paper.
40     3. Provide insights about the role of conceptual and mathematical modelling as part of inter-
41        disciplinary projects in healthcare operational research.

42       In order to address these questions, we examined related literature looking firstly at the evidence
43   of the benefit of a radiographer-led discharge service, and then at how pathway analysis and
44   modelling in ED has been applied using operational research techniques. A description of the
45   Minor Injuries pathway in ED is subsequently presented in section 3 as a result of mapping and
46   discussion sessions with ED staff. Building on this, we develop a discrete event simulation (DES)
47   model as a suitable representation of the generic pathway which we present together with the
48   extensive data sample we used for our study. In section 4, we present findings from a series of
49   what-if simulation studies aiming to quantify the effects of introducing radiographer-led discharge.
50   In particular, we analyse the trade-off between costs of providing such a streamlining concept and
51   the resulting benefits, i.e. time savings. Finally, we outline how this study could inform practice
52   at EDs in general and discuss benefits and drawbacks from this work.




                                                       2

53   2. Background

54       The study presented in this paper brings together radiographic research looking at the potential
55   for earlier patient discharge and staff training, with systems modelling using operational research
56   techniques to support health service redesign. Hence both we will initially provide background on
57   the medical application before addressing the role of operational research in this context.

58   2.1. Medical background
59       Typically, diagnostic images acquired for patients on a minor injuries pathway in ED are inter-
60   preted in the first instance by nurses or junior doctors and the patients are treated or discharged
61   based on these results. Radiologists or reporting radiographers then review the images either as
62   soon as possible following imaging (hot reporting) or during the next available reporting session
63   (delayed or cold reporting). Image acquisition is at the core of every radiographer’s role, who un-
64   like radiologists are not doctors, but the exact specification of the job role, level of autonomy and
65   responsibilities vary across the world. The educational pathways are also very distinct. In the UK,
66   which is the origin of our study, a radiographer is required to have completed an undergraduate
67   degree programme which entails both academic and clinical training. Once qualified they are then
68   able to progress their career through participation in postgraduate education in order to achieve
69   Advanced or even Consultant Practitioner status (this would include reporting duties, i.e. provid-
70   ing a definitive diagnosis from an image). Undergraduate and postgraduate programmes of study
71   must be recognised and accredited by the governing body of the profession, the Society and College
72   of Radiographers (SCoR). Radiographer reporting has become widely accepted in recent years and
73   a cross sectional survey in 2015 demonstrated that radiographer reporting was occurring in 55.1%
74   of the respondent sites [4]. The SCoR recommend a minimum of a postgraduate certificate (PGC)
75   taught at Masters level in the area of reporting for radiographers expanding in to this area of
76   practice [5].
77       The responsibilities of radiographers in the UK include the acquisition of images, but prelimi-
78   nary clinical evaluation (PCE) is also recommended in the ED setting. This is a comment provided
79   by the radiographer with regard to any normal or abnormal findings present on the image they
80   have acquired. It should be noted that a PCE is not considered to be a conclusive report but is
81   intended to alert the referrer of any potential abnormality assisting in the image interpretation
82   undertaken by the ED doctors and ENPs, which underpin their decisions on further management
83   of the patient, i.e. choosing the correct pathway for treatment or discharge. However, in a small
84   minority of hospitals, radiographer discharge is undertaken at the point of imaging, but despite the
85   reported benefits, this has yet to be adopted by other hospitals. Finally, radiographer reporting
86   of projection radiography has become a standard aspect of advanced practice within the UK over
87   the last 20 years and radiographers, with appropriate training, have consistently demonstrated
88   the ability to accurately report radiographs at a standard comparable to Radiologists [6]. This
89   portfolio might exceed the requirements of comparable jobs in other countries, but it marks the
90   reference skill set for this study.
91       In general, nurses undertaking image interpretation roles have considerably less image inter-
92   pretation education than their reporting radiographer counterparts [7]. A number of authors have
93   reported a reasonable accuracy of nurse-led image interpretation in the ED setting [8, 9, 10]. How-
94   ever, radiographers with additional education in image interpretation were able to demonstrate
95   greater accuracy in this area of practice [6]. Discrepancies between the initial diagnosis in the ED
96   and the subsequent radiology report support the argument for RLD [11, 12, 13, 14]. Missed or
                                                      3

 97   delayed fracture diagnosis constitutes a substantially large financial burden to the UK’s National
 98   Health Service (NHS) arising from litigation [15, 16, 17], so reducing missed or delayed diagnosis
 99   is key in any service development.
100        A pilot study from a hospital in the UK explored the potential of radiographer-led immediate
101   reporting and discharge or referral for treatment direct from the radiology department for patients
102   who had care plans detailed by ED [18]. This showed that the mean journey time for patients
103   discharged directly by radiographers was reduced by more than 50% compared to the time prior
104   to the study (i.e. 52 versus 134 minutes). Also for patients being referred on by a radiographer
105   time in ED could be reduced by more than 60 minutes. From a randomised controlled trial of
106   immediate or delayed reporting, Snaith et al. [19] reported that the reporting did not increase
107   the patient journey time. Besides the effects on time, a significant reduction of errors in image
108   interpretation was also observed. A study by [20] explored the cost effectiveness and quality of
109   life outcome measures. There was a potential cost-saving of GBP 23.40 per patient for immediate
110   reporting, while there were no differences reported in patient quality of life as measured by the
111   EQ-5D at 8 weeks following their ED visit between the two arms.
112        Despite the clear benefits achievable by employing reporting radiographers within the ED and
113   Minor Injury Unit (MIU) setting, there are currently insufficient numbers of radiographers in the
114   UK to sustain an immediate reporting service. In fact, following a recent survey, just over half
115   of hospitals responding (179 hospital sites in the UK and on the British Isles) have reporting ra-
116   diographers [4]. Despite the benefits of the concept, smaller or medium-sized hospitals are unable
117   to introduce radiographer-led discharge with immediate reporting because there are insufficient
118   reporting radiographers available. Furthermore, most importantly, the evidence currently avail-
119   able is not strong enough to demonstrate the benefits reported in the literature would apply to
120   individual service providers due to differences in patient pathways and hospital sizes. Finally, with
121   an increasing demand for nursing staff in the South West of the UK and nationally NHS providers
122   are struggling to recruit. The strategic vision to develop the radiographers’ role in order to provide
123   radiographer-led discharge from the ED is a potential resolution to ease the burden on ED services
124   both locally, nationally, and potentially worldwide.

125   2.2. Discrete Event Simulation in Emergency Departments
126       EDs are among the most intensively studied areas within a hospital and numerous reviews
127   support the choice of DES models to explore patient flows while taking into account various routing
128   policies and stochasticity of both arrivals and activities along the process (e.g. Günal and Pidd [21]
129   or Gul and Guneri [22] for comprehensive reviews). Crowded departments and excessive waiting
130   times for patients are frequently cited as the main reasons why researchers aim to improve efficiency
131   of service delivery [23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. DES has specifically been used to support streamlining efforts
132   in EDs and has been widely applied for more than 20 years [24, 27, 28]. Besides DES studies, a
133   large variety of techniques is applied ranging from Monte-Carlo-Simulation [29] to approaches using
134   Queueing Networks [30] and hybrid approaches (e.g. combining agent-based simulation and DES)
135   which are among the recently emerging trends in simulation in healthcare [31]. The vast majority
136   of studies which support planning in ED originate from real world applications and address actual
137   problems. However, most of the studies published do not to lead to implementation of findings as
138   stated in Brailsford et al. [32].
139       Over the last decades, DES has remained a popular tool to support decision problems in
140   healthcare and particularly in EDs (e.g. [33, 34, 35, 36]). Recently, studies have focused on patient
141   pathway changes in ED due to either newly issued medical guidelines or in light of newly available
                                                         4

142   medical evidence. Rachuba et al. [37] focus on pathways for patients presenting at ED with chest
143   pain, whereas pathways related to stroke treatment are at the centre in the study by Komenda et al.
144   [38]. Both papers employ DES models in order to assess the impact of the changes. Another study
145   by Yang et al. [39] investigates how different triaging policies in ED affect the time patients spent
146   in ED. In their DES study, greater time savings in ED can be observed with improved triaging
147   when the workload for physicians is high. In relation, an empirical study by Kuntz and Sülz [40]
148   found that higher or better qualified ED staff can treat patients faster when attendance level is
149   elevated. On the opposite, slower durations for treatment were found with lower utilisation in
150   ED. In contrast to the available literature, our paper is unique as the concept of radiographer-led
151   discharge has only been addressed in medical pilot studies as outlined above. A pathway modelling
152   and simulation study of this concept has not been published yet.

153   3. Case Study

154   3.1. Description of ED
155       Our paper evolves from a study that investigated the benefits of a streamlining concept Radio-
156   grapher-led Discharge (RLD) for patients on a Minor Injuries pathway in ED. The work was funded
157   by Health Education England (South West, HESW) and carried out in collaboration with acute
158   trusts in the South West of England. The wider project looked at image interpretation competence
159   among radiographers and the impact of pathway redesign on the patient journey. The first part
160   featured a training needs analysis to assess the current level of competency in regard to diagnostic
161   image interpretation (i.e. X-Rays) among radiographers and other members of ED staff. The
162   second part of the study – presented in this paper – aimed to model current practice in ED and
163   subsequently quantify potential time savings for patients being suitable for early discharge from
164   ED. This part of the project was carried out in collaboration with managers, clinicians, analysts,
165   and administrators at two hospitals in the South West of England. The main project team consisted
166   of two operational researchers and two radiographers based at the University of Exeter’s Medical
167   School. It was intended to demonstrate how the concept of RLD could be beneficial at any hospital.
168   Hence, we aimed to provide a sound modelling framework which could be applied to any hospital
169   setting. The framework was aimed at medium-sized hospitals in the UK (district general hospital)
170   in order to investigate the beneficial effects of RLD on the hospital’s practice – if any. This work
171   was carried out over 9 months – independent of the training needs analysis which featured the
172   major part of the overall study.

173   3.2. Methodology
174      We employed a phased approach which benefited from good links to clinicians. This helped to
175   maximise the utility of our work, in particular of the DES model and its results. The following
176   components – briefly highlight hereafter – serve as a framework for the remainder of the paper:
177     1. Problem structuring approaches and assessing complexity
178     2. Conceptual modelling and identification of key focus
179     3. Data sourcing and analysis
180     4. DES model building, coding, and verification & validation
181     5. What-if experimentation and ways to implementation


                                                       5

182        The problem structuring took place in multiple sessions at a medium-size hospital in the South
183   West of England and focused on the minor injuries pathway in ED. Together with consultants,
184   nurses and information analysts, we captured the current practice at ED and visualised the flow of
185   patients from admission to a final decision about discharge or admission. Methods employed were
186   process mapping and semi-structured interviews with clinicians. The semi-structured interviews
187   were intended to acquire a sound understanding of processes along the minor injuries pathway in
188   ED i.e. sequencing, staff responsibilities, routing, etc. It was considered important to have both
189   doctors, nurses, radiographers, radiologists, and analysts involved in this study as it would allow to
190   capture many different views on challenges, opportunities, and potential limitations of this study.
191   With respect to the specific individuals, some of the clinicians working at the hospital had existing
192   links to the university and those clinicians suggested further links to administrators and data
193   analysts. During the second phase, we simplified the underlying pathway to develop a conceptual
194   model capturing key aspects of the pathway. This was done in close collaboration with clinicians
195   and particularly information analysts in order to assess data availability. Clinicians then outlined
196   the intended pathway redesign which was again captured in a conceptual flow chart diagram.
197   One of the collaborating hospitals provided a well-documented historic data set which we used to
198   populate the simulation model. We present a separate descriptive analysis in order to document the
199   importance of good quality data in our study. Next, the conceptual models shaped the development
200   of a discrete event simulation model which captured the current system pathways and allowed us to
201   explore pathway redesign options, e.g. the introduction of radiographer-led discharge options. The
202   model was verified and validated using both hospital experts and large historic data sets of good
203   quality. Clinicians and managers specified the necessary changes to the minor injuries pathway
204   and defined a series of what-if scenarios for analyses. Finally, during the experimentation phase
205   we populated the DES model using historic data and quantified the effects of proposed pathway
206   changes following the introduction of radiographer-led discharge. These experiments also highlight
207   potential issues on the way to a wider implementation of the concept.
208        The project lend itself very naturally to the use of DES as a visual interface using distinct
209   software, capturing uncertainty in process durations and arrivals, and incorporating stochastic
210   routing options were key requirements for the pathway modelling. As the concept of radiographer-
211   led discharge is a novel approach in comparison to common ED practice, it was desirable to
212   have a visual interface, in particular with the aim to potentially roll-out this concept to other
213   hospitals. The visual interface was considered to be supportive to achieve the required buy-in at
214   other hospitals. The potential to use the developed tool elsewhere was a major goal from the start.
215   Hence, we decided to use Simul8 (Simul8 Corporation, [41]) which is widely used for DES modelling
216   and in particular for healthcare applications. Its graphical interface allows to provide live output
217   of performance measures which was considered helpful in this case. This feature would allow the
218   users to track individual patients and also see impact of pathway changes developing over time.
219        Engaging with information analysts alongside all phases was key to identify data availability and
220   to confirm which key performance indicators could be quantified. Likewise, important stakeholders
221   (i.e. clinical staff working in ED, but also analysts and managers at the hospital) confirmed the
222   most important performance metrics which were then included in the DES model. These links
223   were highly significant to the model development and the analysis of outputs. Since the focus of
224   this study was very narrow from the outset, we did not include additional problem structuring
225   techniques such as CATWOE analysis (the reader is referred to the work of Smyth and Checkland,
226   e.g. [42]). It became clear during early stages of the project work that the metrics used herein and

                                                        6

227   the stakeholders involved were of particular interest and no deeper analysis was deemed necessary.

228   3.3. Conceptual model building
229       According to the widely used concepts proposed by Robinson [43, 44], we distinguish four
230   aspects of the conceptual model development, i.e. objectives, inputs, outputs, model content. The
231   project’s objectives were specified as follows:
232     1. What changes to an existing minor injuries pathways are necessary to incorporate RLD?
233        The main task is to capture the current practice at the hospital’s emergency department.
234        This includes analysing the current pathway and available historic data records. Both is
235        needed to inform the decision about reconfiguration of the current system.
236     2. What is the impact of RLD for a minor injuries pathway on patients’ length of stay in ED?
237        Based on the identified options to change the current system, i.e. what-if scenarios, a simu-
238        lation model will be used to quantify the impact in terms of patients’ length of stay.
239     3. What is the trade-off between the required staffing supply and desired effects when intro-
240        ducing RLD? Explore, how different availabilities of RLD would affect the length of stay in
241        department, e.g. limiting the availability to certain weekdays or days on the weekend.
242       For this study, historic data sets from a hospital in the South West of the UK particularly
243   looking at patient arrivals, process times (i.e. time of individual and between consecutive activities)
244   and resource availabilities, were key input factors. Besides, the processes and patient pathways in
245   ED were important for developing a useful model. The output of this modelling project is in fact
246   a proof of concept, quantifying the effects of radiographic discharge in comparison to traditional
247   discharge. This study wants to provide a generic model which can answer this question at a variety
248   of hospitals.
249       The structure of the underlying minor injuries pathway in ED is of crucial importance for the
250   pathway simulation model. We captured the current practice at a hospital in the South West
251   of England and held an inter-disciplinary mapping session together with an Emergency Nurse
252   Practitioner, an ED administrator, and other key members of ED staff. This session enabled us to
253   assess the complexity and variety of the pathways in the minor injuries unit. Most commonly, minor
254   injuries include diagnosis such as appendicular fractures, bruises or sprains (i.e. hand, foot, wrist,
255   ankles) or soft tissue injuries. Minor injuries regularly account for more than 55% of the overall ED
256   attendance and are mostly cared for in a separate area of the department, but in close proximity to
257   the Majors area. About half the patients presenting with minor injuries require medical imaging
258   to assist with the diagnosis. The vast majority of those images (in our study more than 95%) are
259   diagnostic X-Ray images. In this study, very few patients receive ultrasound, CT or MRI scans as
260   part of their diagnosis. This is standard for minor injury pathways because the majority of injuries
261   presenting within this stream of patients are readily diagnosed using radiographs alone. A minority
262   may have other imaging if their presenting symptoms are complex or they deteriorate during their
263   time in the hospital. The mapping session’s outcome is visualised in Figure 1. One might expect
264   the pathway to be fairly linear with a few routing options but, in fact, it is complex incorporating
265   a number of loops, such as repeated imaging or gathering expert advice. The hospital supports up
266   to ten different discharge options for this pathway, which include various follow-up options such as
267   plastering, physiotherapy or referral to the GP.
268       Typically, patients register their attendance in ED at a dedicated desk before joining the waiting
269   room. An ENP or another qualified nurse then assesses the severity of patient’s illness or injury
270   during triage and diagnostic imaging might be requested at this point subject to certain conditions.
                                                        7

                Figure 1: Outcome of an inter-disciplinary mapping session at an acute trust with ED staff.


271   For example, imaging for younger children cannot be requested at triage, but needs to be requested
272   by a doctor during a medical assessment. Generally, the ordering of diagnostic imaging varies
273   with medical experience and might also vary throughout the day or the week depending on the
274   practitioner’s own scope of practice. However, the vast majority of images are requested at triage
275   and subsequently interpreted during a clinical assessment led by a doctor or ENP. During triage,
276   patients may also be streamlined to other specialised departments of the hospital (e.g. outpatient
277   clinics such as Ear-Nose-Throat, Ophthalmology, or a Dental Unit) or to the Majors area in ED
278   when necessary. Following triage, during a medical assessment, additional advice might be acquired
279   from radiographers, radiologists, or consultants. Further imaging might be required to finalise a
280   decision on further management of the patient. Once the diagnosis has been established and the
281   appropriate treatment given (plaster, pain relief, dressing etc.), the patient can then be discharged
282   to the care of the physiotherapy team, orthopaedics or other specialist service or their own GP as
283   necessary. Admissions become necessary for only approximately 5% of all patients. An abnormal
284   image indicating a fracture does not usually lead to an admission, unless surgical intervention is
285   required. However, a normal image regularly leads to a discharge unless other reasons require
286   an admission into hospital, such as other or multiple conditions. Most EDs are based close to
287   Radiology, where patients are sent for imaging, while others will have one or more X-Ray rooms
288   within the emergency department. Alongside the flow of patients (as described), data requirements
289   and their availabilities were linked to process activities or resource requirements as part of the
290   mapping sessions.
291       The simplified pathway in Figure 2 focuses on the key activities which are performed on a minor
292   injuries pathway. As part of our discussions with ED staff, three distinct routes were identified
293   and we will refer to those as Pathway Options A, B, and C. The major differentiation being
294   whether imaging is required (A, B) or not (C) and subsequently when X-Ray imaging is performed
295   during the minor injuries attendance. The first and most common option is that imaging is taken
296   after triage where it was requested (solid line, Option A). Secondly, imaging may be requested
297   as part of the medical assessment by a doctor (dotted line, Option B). Finally, for some patients

                                                            8

                                                          Registration                                  Registration




                                                                                                          Triage
                                                            Triage


                                                                                            Imaging                    Assessment

                                         Imaging                             Assessment

                                                                                           Decision                     Imaging

                                                           Decision
                                                                                                         Follow-up
                                                                                                        consultation


                                                                                           Discharge     Discharge
                                        Discharge                             Admission                                Admission
                                                                                          Radiography   Consultation


                                       Pathway Option A               Pathway Option C

                                       Pathway Option B                  All pathways


                                 Figure 2: Generic pathway for minor injuries in ED.


298   imaging is not required and only a consultation is held during which a decision is made whether to
299   admit or to discharge (dashed line, Option C). In general, approximately 50% - 60% of all minor
300   injuries attendances require medical imaging and the vast majority of those sees the Triage nurse
301   requesting the X-Ray imaging. Only 5% - 20% of all images are requested during the clinical
302   assessment. Exact figures might slightly differ for hospitals across England and internationally, yet
303   the general classification in options A, B, and C holds as well as the proportions of patients being
304   a key parameter for the routing in ED. The conceptual model excludes activities which follow the
305   attendance at ED, i.e. plastering or physiotherapy since those processes do not affect the changes
306   of interest to this study or impact the potential service redesign options.

307   3.4. Descriptive data analysis
308       The collaborating hospital provided 23 months-worth of data covering all ED attendances from
309   April 2014 to February 2016 on the minor injuries pathway. In total, 2810 individual patient
310   episodes were considered with slightly more male (55%) than female (45%) patients. The average
311   age of patients was 31.8 yrs with a median of 26 (male: 29.2 average and 24 median, female: 35.0
312   average and 29 median). For 56% of all attendances imaging was not required. In the remainder
313   of this work we do not differentiate either process durations or routing probabilities by gender or
314   age. This was beyond the scope of this study but could be included in the DES model for further
315   experiments. Here, clinicians confirmed there were no notable differences across those categories
316   – statistical testing was omitted to verify this. A monthly average of 120 patients attended ED
317   with minor injuries, with a maximum of 213 patients during a busy period in autumn 2015 and a
318   minimum of 64 patients in early 2015. A slight positive trend over the observed period of time was
319   present which is in line with the general increase of ED attendances in England over the last years
                                                               9

                                                                     1000                                                               750
                                                                                  Number of patients        Inter-arrival times




                                 Average level of daily attendance




                                                                                                                                              Inter-arrival times (in min)
                                                                     800

                                                                                                                                        500
                                                                     600


                                                                     400
                                                                                                                                        250

                                                                     200


                                                                       0                                                                0
                                                                            MON   TUE     WED      THU     FRI       SAT     SUN



                                Figure 3: Attendance levels and inter-arrivals per day of week.



                                Discharged                                                     ●                 ●● ●   ●●   ●      ●   ●




                                          Admitted                                   ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●● ●●           ●         ●                ● ●   ●




                                                                             0     60    120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540
                                                                                           Length of stay in ED (in min)


      Figure 4: Boxplots representing LOS in ED for patients being admitted or discharged. Dots inside the boxes indicate
      the respective mean values.


320   (NHS England 2017 [45]). Arrivals varied significantly according to different weekdays and also
321   during days. Figure 3 shows in graph (a) that more than 50% of arrivals were on a weekend and
322   Wednesday had the lowest average daily attendance rate. Average inter-arrival rates as depicted
323   in the same graph varied similarly to the arrivals and were shortest on weekends. Furthermore,
324   the hourly inter-arrival times vary throughout the day with different effect sizes on weekdays and
325   weekends. Approximately 5% of patients have to be admitted to inpatient wards, either to receive
326   specialised care or in order to be monitored over a certain period. Admitting a patient commonly
327   leads to longer stays in ED because admissions require more organisational tasks to be carried out
328   before a patient can actually be transferred from the emergency department to an inpatient ward
329   or to a clinic.
330       The average LOS on the investigated minor injuries pathway was 139min (184min, 95th per-
331   centile) for discharged patients and 212min (237min, 95th percentile) for admissions (Figure 4).
332   The overall length of stay - as the weighted average across both categories - was 143.5min for all
333   patients (199min, 95th percentile). Discharged patients had on average a shorter LOS with almost
334   no 4 hour target breaches, whereas admitted patients - even though they stayed longer - had a
335   similarly low probability of breaching the aforementioned 4 hour target. For the given data set,
336   the target of 95% of patients not breaching 4 hours is met and thus we neglect the number of
337   those actually breaching this target in further analyses. A more detailed analysis of the LOS in
338   ED indicated variation with respect to the previously mentioned Pathway Options A, B, and C
339   (Table 1). Patients spend on average significantly less time in ED when no imaging is required
340   (140min versus 148min). Also, the LOS is significantly longer when imaging is requested at triage
                                                                                                   10

                                                                         Length of stay (in min)
                                                # patients        %   Avg     Median    0.25    0.75    > 4h
              Overall                              2810               143.5    141      97     189.8     32
              Imaging                              1303       46.4     148     146      102     191      10
               Triage – Imaging – Seen (A)          748       26.6     153     153      111     193       3
               Triage – Seen – Imaging (B)          555       19.8    141.3    131      94      189       7
              No imaging
              Triage – Seen (C)                    1507       53.6    139.7    138       90     187      22

      Table 1: Key performance indicators of the data provided by the collaborating hospital. Columns Q1 and Q3 report
      the 25th and the 75th percentile respectively of the LOS and the rightmost column shows the number of 4 hour
      breaches.


341   and thus takes place before the assessment (141min versus 153min).
342       Similar effects could be observed across the sub groups regarding patients being admitted and
343   those being discharged. As only a small proportion of around 5% of all patients are admitted, the
344   impact of their LOS on the overall LOS can be neglected and no further analysis is needed. Since
345   RLD will only affect pathway options A and B, these require a more detailed analysis. Pathway
346   option C, however, is included in the simulation study later on, as a significant amount of patients
347   attending ED affect the queues, e.g. at the consultation, and therefore we still include it in this
348   more detailed analysis of the process times. Figure 5 allows the identification of potential savings
349   which could result from introducing RLD. If imaging is requested during triage (Pathway Option
350   A) there is a delay of approximately 90 minutes on average from imaging being performed until the
351   patient finally leaves ED. When imaging is requested during the consultation, there is still a wait
352   of on average of 50 minutes between imaging and discharging the patient, which could be reduced.
353   Additionally, earlier discharge would free ENPs’ and doctors time and could have beneficial effects
354   on other patients on the minor injuries pathway as doctors’ availability would be increased. The
355   previously mentioned durations for process steps, e.g. Triage to Imaging, include the durations
356   of the actual process activities, i.e. triaging or imaging. The hospital information system only
357   provides a single time stamp for each of the steps along the pathway. It is therefore necessary to
358   make the assumption that those time intervals capture start-to-start relations of activities.

359   Key performance metrics and system parameters
360   Building upon the available data records we identified three key metric to indicate changes in
361   performance which will be highlighted subsequently. Moreover, we link this to a key parameter,
362   i.e. the availability of RLD and propose to investigate to what extent the changes in performance
363   depend on the availability of the streamlining concept.
364   Length of stay in ED: RLD aims to reduce delays prior to discharge from ED, in particular for
365   patients without a fracture and no other complicating diagnosis. Therefore, the length of stay
366   (LOS) in ED is a key performance metric to assess the effects of radiographer-led discharge after
367   imaging. EDs in England have to deal with the 4 hour target which intends to limit the time
368   patients spend in ED in order to reduce the number of unnecessarily long stays. Introduced by the
369   Department of Health in 2004, this standard requires that 95% of all ED attendances should be
370   no longer than four hours for any hospital in the England. Generally, the LOS on a minor injuries
371   pathway is likely to be shorter compared to the overall ED figures. Thus, an analysis on historical
372   data later on will help quantify the impact on the number of 4 hour breaches.
                                                             11

                                                                                      Imaging                                                           Triage to




                                                                                                                                  Pathway Opti
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ●● ● ● ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                          Imaging




                                                                 Pathway
                                                                                    Imaging to                           ●                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●●●●●●
                                                                                          Seen                                                       Imaging to                       ●                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●●●●●

                                                                                       Seen to                                                                   Seen
                                                                                                                     ●                               ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                        ●●    ●●●●
                                                                                         Leave                                                             Seen to                ●                     ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●   ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●   ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                               Leave
                                                                                                             0           60         120 180 240 300
                                                                                                                                  Time in minutes 0 60                                           120 180 240 300
                                                                                                                                                                                               Time in minutes

                                                                   Arrival to                                    ●       ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●● ●●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                         Triage




                                                                 Pathway Option B
                                    Arrival to       ●    ●
                                                         ●●
                                                         ●
                                                         ●●●●
                                                            ●●
                                                             ●● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                 Arrival to                                   ●       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                          ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                Pathway Option A

                                        Triage                                                                                           Triage




                                                                                                                                  Pathway Option B
                                                                    Triage to                                    ●       ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                              ●  ●
                                                                                                                               ●●●●● ● ●

                                     Triage to                              Seen                                                  Triage to
                                                       ●        ●●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●●●
                                                                   ● ●● ● ● ● ●                                                                                               ●                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●● ●         ●
                                      Imaging                         Seen to                                                             Seen
                                                                                                                 ●   ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●●●●
                                                                                                                         ●  ● ●

                                   Imaging to                         Imaging                                                         Seen to
                                                       ●              ●●
                                                                       ●●●
                                                                         ●●●●                                                                                                 ●               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ●
                                          Seen                  Imaging to                                                           Imaging
                                                                                                                   ●              ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●   ●

                                      Seen to                             Leave                                                Imaging to
                                                         ●                          ●
                                                                                    ●●●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●●●●●
                                                                                            ●●●●                                                                                      ●                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●
                                         Leave                                                                                           Leave
                                                                                0 60 120 180 240 300
                                                 0       60       120 180 240 300   Time in minutes 0 60 120 180 240 300
                                                                Time in minutes                         Time in minutes

                                                                                     Arrival to
                                                                 Pathway Option C




                                                                                                                 ●               ●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                 ●●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                                        ●●● ●● ●●           ●

                                    Arrival to                                           Triage                                                       Arrival to



                                                                                                                                  Pathway Option C
                                                     ●       ●●
                                                             ●
                                                             ●●
                                                              ●●●
                                                               ● ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ● ●●
                                                                 ●●                                                                                                           ●               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●● ●● ●●     ●
                                        Triage                                                                                                            Triage
                Pathway Option B




                                                                                 Triage to                                   ●                                    ●●     ●●
                                     Triage to       ●                  ●
                                                                        ●●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●  ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                          ●●●
                                                                           ● ●●●●
                                                                             ●● ●
                                                                                      Seen
                                                                                 ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                       Triage to                          ●                                ●●   ●●
                                          Seen                                           Seen to                                                            Seen
                                                                                                                         ●                             ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                                          ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                               ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●● ●●            ●
                                      Seen to        ●         ●●
                                                               ●
                                                               ● ●
                                                                 ●
                                                                ●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●●●●
                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                                                           Leave                                                          Seen to                     ●                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●   ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●● ●●           ●
                                      Imaging                                                                                                               Leave
                                   Imaging to            ●                            ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                      ● ● ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                        ●●●    ●             0           60         120 180 240 300
                                         Leave                                                                                    Time in minutes 0
                                                                                         120 180 240 300                                            60
                                                                                       Time in minutes
       Figure 5: Boxplots explaining
                                0    60
                                     process
                                          120 times
                                                180 for
                                                     240pathway
                                                         300    options. Dots inside the boxes show respective means.
                                        Time in minutes

373   Number of discharges: Another important criterion is the amount of radiographer discharges that
      can actually Arrival to
                Pathway Option C




374                 be offered   by
                                  ●   the hospital. A greater availability of highly skilled radiographers
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ● ●
                                                                   ●●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ● ●
                                                                      ●●● ●● ●●            ●
                       Triage
375   (e.g. reporting radiographers) will support a higher level of RLD where no fracture is detected.
                    Triage to
376   Increasing the number
                         Seen  of reporting
                                     ●
                                              radiographers, however, also increases staffing costs as those
                                                                                                   ●●   ●●



377                  Seen to staff ●and more expensive than lower grade radiographers. Also, as previous
      are a highly qualified
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●●●●●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                              ● ●●
                                                                                                ●● ●●                ●
378                      there is a significant training need to upskill radiographers in order to facilitate
      studies revealed,Leave
379   direct discharge, and thus the hospital needs to decide to which volume of patients radiographer-led
380   discharge should be made 0 available.
                                    60 120 180 240 300
                                                                Time in minutes
381   Number of clinical assessments: The introduction of RLD intends to free time for doctors and
382   ENPs which could be used for other patients with potentially more complex needs. Thus, the
383   number of clinical assessments is considered a proxy for clinical workload occurring on a minor
384   injuries pathway.
385   Availability of RLD: The beneficial effects of introducing RLD will likely be limited by either (1) a
386   hospital’s financial situation (higher costs for trained radiographers) or (2) the limited availability
387   of accurately trained radiographers available to be scheduled. Thus, a hospital is interested in
388   what time it should choose in order to allow suitably trained radiographers to discharge patients.
389   Anticipated trade-offs: Finally, the configurations of the system (i.e. availability of resources) will
390   affect the mentioned performance indicators, i.e. higher (lower) availability will lead to stronger
391   (less strong) effects on the LOS, the number of patients actually being discharged, and fewer
392   consultations in ED

393   3.5. DES model development
394       We used Simul8 (Simul8 Corporation, [41]) to develop a generic DES model for minor injuries
395   pathways which can be adapted to different hospital settings. It is intended as an interactive tool
                                                                                                                         12

                     Figure 6: User interface of discrete event simulation model developed in Simul8.


396   for both decision-makers and the other stakeholders affected by potential pathway changes. The
397   two main parts of this decision support tool are the DES model at the front-end and the data set
398   required to populate the simulation model at the back-end. As shown in Figure 6, the model sup-
399   ports decision-making through visualising the pathway, highlighting volume data and performance
400   information of ED such as length of stay, and information focused on a single patient, e.g. waits
401   before seen by a clinician. Our discussions with practitioners demonstrated that an interactive in-
402   terface facilitates engagement and supports working towards implementing successfully evaluated
403   changes.
404       The simulation model’s graphical user interface (GUI), as shown in figure 6, visualises the
405   patient’s way through ED (left to right) and builds upon the conceptual models introduced earlier
406   (figures 2 and 7). All steps of the patient journey from arrival, via registration, triage, imaging,
407   assessment, and finally admission or discharge are captured visually as individual entities. The
408   GUI provides live outputs on model parameters (bottom left corner, e.g. mean of inter-arrival
409   time distribution, day of week etc.) or waiting times before an activity starts (below individual
410   activities). Furthermore, information on key performance indicators such as average time spent
411   in ED (box on the right) is captured as well as aggregated patient numbers/attendance (with the
412   activities, and also in table at bottom left corner). Finally, individual patient data (i.e. process
413   times) and their pathway option are captured in the top right corner of the GUI.
414       The model captures time-dependent inter-arrival times and also varying process times along
415   the pathway through ED. Upon arrival the pathway option for patients (being either A, B, or C
416   as shown in figure 2) is sampled from a distribution based on the historic data set and routing
417   along the pathway is based on labels assigned to patients. In the model, we considered queues and
418   their associated activities as a single step of process. This is because the recorded timestamps for
419   process activities is not coherently reported. Thus, for example, we modelled the time from triage
420   to imaging as a delay in the queue and do not consider durations for the activities themselves.
421   The user is enabled to specify the extent to which RLD is to be carried out, e.g. only on one day
422   per week, during the weekend or 24/7. After patients have completed their pathway through ED
423   they are either admitted or discharged which is sampled from a distribution based on the historic
424   data set. According to the decision-makers preferred level of detail, both inter-day and intra-day
425   variation can be captured. Various members of ED staff pointed out that another key feature

                                                           13

426   would be to have real-time output of information on waits and the level of attendance. In response
427   to these ED staff requests we incorporated information on patient waits, the average length of stay
428   in department and patient counts for the various pathway options in order to make the DES model
429   more useful. The developed model also features a dedicated section to analyse the pathway from
430   a single patient’s perspective which allows quantification of individual savings from the status quo
431   setting to the radiographer-led discharge.
432       Our model is intended to inform how radiographer-led discharge affects the length of stay of
433   various patient subgroups as previously outlined. This means that the routing of patients, e.g. at
434   triage, is based on historic facts, i.e. we assume that for a particular patient the pathway option
435   (such as A, B, or C) is known before triaging takes place. Discussions with ED practitioners
436   pointed out that an analysis of different pathway proportions could be informative as it would
437   capture different attitudes towards ordering imaging at Triage or Assessment respectively. Also,
438   we assume that no repeated imaging during one visit takes place as this would again have to
439   take into account doctor’s decision making process which cannot be quantified satisfactory using
440   only the available data set. In contrast to what the outcome of the mapping session suggested
441   follow-up treatments at the hospital, such as plastering or physiotherapy, are not included in the
442   pathway. The effects on the number of patients requiring those treatments within hospital should
443   not be affected from a change to radiographer-led discharge as radiographers will mainly discharge
444   patients. Assessing the impact on the overall LOS including those additional services is therefore
445   out of the scope for this study.

446   Verification & validation of DES model
447   Verifying the model was in, fact, done in constant feedback discussions with clinicians, in particular
448   with radiographers involved in this study. Clinicians at the hospital confirmed that time stamps are
449   commonly recorded while the activity takes place but not necessarily to mark either the beginning
450   or the end of an activity. With a sufficiently large number of patients going through this system,
451   we assume that biases towards either start or end of activities are levelled out. We validated the
452   DES model against the historic data to assess how it represents the status quo. Data was captured
453   over a period of 699 days after a warm-up period of 2 years, we ran a trial with five individual
454   simulation runs. The run time was chosen in order to be able to compare model outputs directly
455   to the provided data set covering an uninterrupted series of the most recent patient records. The
456   warm-up period of two years was chosen experimentally capturing the variation in the LOS as
457   the major LOS. For the this study it was important to calibrate the model towards the historic
458   data in order to be able to demonstrate effects in relation to most recent patient attendance. A
459   comparison against 1 or 3 years of warm-up led to model results (i.e. KPIs) which had greater
460   deviation from the historic values. Figure 2 shows that both the LOS in ED and also the number
461   of patients attending ED on either of the three pathway options form a good representation of the
462   historic data set.

463   3.6. Study design and experimentation
464   3.6.1. Pathway redesign
465       The introduction of radiographer-led discharge adds a new routing option to the studied path-
466   way. Figure 7 represents how this affects Pathway Options A and B, i.e. those where acquiring
467   X-Ray images would be needed. Initially, the hospital aims to select a subgroup of all those patients
468   receiving diagnostic imaging, who will then benefit from the proposed changes, e.g. all those with
469   minor appendicular injuries or those with injured lower limbs. If, under clearly defined conditions,
                                                       14

                                   Historic Data                 DES Model
          Model parameter             Average        Average     95% Confidence Interval     Relative deviation
          Length of stay in ED
            Overall                     143.5       143.4528          [142.5, 144.4]                0.03%
             Option A                  153.03       152.5655          [151.3, 153.9]                0.30%
             Option B                  141.26       141.3876          [138.0, 144.8]                0.09%
             Option C                  139.67       139.8262          [138.0, 141.7]                0.11%
            Discharges                  139.7       140.043           [139.1, 141.0]                0.25%
            Admissions                  212.3       209.3986          [207.3, 211.4]                1.37%
          Attendance
            Overall                     2810          2826           [2730.3, 2922.1]               0.57%
            Discharges                  2655         2684.8          [2602.7, 2767.3]               1.12%
            Admissions                   150         141.2            [127.6, 154.8]                5.87%

                 Table 2: Validation of model output against the status quo setting based on historic data


470   a radiographer decides to discharge a patient this can then be done immediately after the image
471   has been taken and interpreted. In this case, no further assessment would be required and patients
472   could be sent to physiotherapy, the plaster room, or home with further advice on pain management,
473   e.g. using specific information leaflets etc. Radiographer-led discharge would require doctors’ pre-
474   authorisation for discharge on the basis of normal images and no other conditions being present
475   which would require specialised help. In addition, a high level of confidence would be necessary
476   for radiographic discharge to proceed on the basis of an X-Ray image. Given those conditions and
477   acknowledging that the vast majority of patients are discharged from ED, the proposed changes
478   could significantly affect a large number of patients on the minor injuries pathway. In addition,
479   the positive effect to be expected on the use of doctors’ time can be considered equally important.
480   During discussions with clinicians it was suggested that the required time for a radiographer-led
481   discharge activity should take on average ten minutes, allowing for some variability. We therefore
482   suggest to model this using a log-normal distribution with mean 10 and standard deviation of 5.
483   In contrast to the common way of discharge, this additional option using highly skilled radiog-
484   raphers shortens the patient journey significantly and helps sending patients home much quicker.
485   Basically, clinicians suggested that the radiographer-led discharge would be a brief consultation
486   following image acquisition and interpretation.

487   3.6.2. What-If-Scenarios
488       In order to investigate whether and to what extent RLD is beneficial we analysed a number
489   of what-if-scenarios alongside the current situation (i.e. Status Quo). These scenarios represent
490   the extent to which RLD would be rolled out, i.e. on one or two days of the weekends, or all
491   day long every day of the week. This could, in fact, also reflect the number of effectively trained
492   radiographers who are authorised to discharge. We compare these scenarios to the Status Quo and
493   identify the likely savings in terms of LOS. We are interested to find out how and to what extend
494   the overall cohort of patients is affected by this streamlining option, and specifically we want
495   to quantify savings along the pathway options A and B. We simulated the same period as was
496   covered through the historic data set, i.e. 699 days. This was expected by collaborators to make
497   the comparison easier. We performed trial runs with five simulation runs, each with independent
498   pseudo-random number seeds. Every single run included a warm-up phase of two years which then
                                                            15

                   Registration                                  Registration                                           Registration



                                                     Option A                    Option B
                                                                   Triage
                     Triage                                                                                               Triage


                                                     Imaging                    Assessment

  Imaging                            Assessment                                                        Imaging                            Assessment

                                                    Decision                      Imaging

                    Decision                                                                                             Decision
                                                                  Follow-up
                                                                 consultation


                                                    Discharge     Discharge
 Discharge                            Admission                                  Admission            Discharge                            Admission
                                                   Radiography   Consultation


Pathway Option A               Pathway Option C                                                      Pathway Option A               Pathway Option C
                 Figure 7: Redesigned pathway including potential radiographer-led discharging option. Formatting for pathway
Pathway Option B            All pathways                                                                Pathway Option B      All pathways
                 options A (imaging ordered during triage) and B (imaging ordered during assessment) according to figure 2.


             499   ensured that the confidence intervals for performance indicators are close to the simulated mean.
             500   The obtained results for the key performance indicators are compared across the different what-
             501   if-scenarios and the Status Quo with a primary focus on savings in average LOS. We conducted a
             502   series of experiments with different levels of detail for the time-dependency of process durations.
                   The model allows for hour-of-arrival-dependent process durations which we have aggregated into
             Modified version for revised paper
             503

             504   groups of four hours length. This was sufficiently accurate and led to good results during the
             505   validation of the model as reported above and is also in line with recent simulation studies in ED
             506   [37]. However, for inter-arrival times we chose detailed blocks of one hour length in order to ensure
             507   that ED attendance was sufficiently close to the historic data.

             508   3.6.3. Trade-off analysis
             509       The beneficial effects of radiographer-led discharge, however, might be restricted due to limited
             510   availability of qualified staff to take over the roles of discharging radiographers. As radiographers
             511   need to be upskilled and trained to be able to discharge patients immediately after imaging, we
             512   are interested in the trade-off between the improvement of the LOS and the associated costs to
             513   achieve this. We propose to use the time during which radiographer-led discharge is available
             514   as a proxy for the costs involved and link this to (1) LOS in ED, (2) the number of patients
             515   discharged by a radiographer, and (3) the number of assessments carried out by clinicians. Hence,
             516   this section extends the previously shown analysis and explores on which days of the week the
             517   effects of introducing this concept would be largest. We compare each weekday as on/off shifts and
             518   allow two shifts on weekends (morning and afternoon) as on/off which leads to a total number of
             519   512 scenarios. For all these scenarios we compare results from simulated trials as specified above.


                                                                     16

                                                                150




                                Length of stay in ED (in min)
                                                                120


                                                                 90


                                                                 60
                                                                          Status Quo           Streamlined pathway

                                                                      Overall     Discharge   Radiographer-led discharge


      Figure 8: Length of stay for all patients and only those being discharged with respect to different intensity of
      radiographer-led discharge. Error bars report the confidence intervals at a 95% level.


520   4. Results

521       We present the computational results in two consecutive steps. Firstly, we highlight the effects
522   on the LOS in ED when RLD is introduced. This is further analysed by looking at effects on the
523   different pathway options. We also analyse the reduction in assessments and the actual number of
524   radiographer discharges. Secondly, all these effects are linked to staffing requirements in order to
525   be able to streamline patient pathways.

526   4.1. General findings
527       Figure 8 clearly demonstrates the beneficial effects of implementing an early discharge strategy
528   on a minor injuries pathway. The sections Status Quo and Streamlined pathway in the graph
529   compare the current setting at the hospital with a setting where RLD is fully implemented. The
530   length of stay for all patients (LOS overall) could be reduced by more than 20min on average, which
531   is particularly achieved by the shortened process between imaging and discharging patients. On
532   average, all discharged patients spent 25min less in the department. This reduction is mainly driven
533   through beneficial effects of RLD which allows to shorten the delay until discharge by 50min (on
534   overall average) - with individual savings being a lot higher. Since approximately 55% of all patients
535   received imaging this limits savings in this particular setting. However, reductions are significantly
536   higher than 50min when imaging was requested at triage. The potential savings for the overall
537   attendance in ED obviously vary according to the proportion of patients for which imaging is
538   required and thus the effects might be either less or more prominent with other hospital settings.
539   Another effect might be the seniority of staff triaging patients: more junior nurses or doctors could
540   tend to request imaging more freely than more experienced members of staff. However, this was
541   beyond the scope of our study and is therefore not included in this analysis.
542       The following analyses add further detail to the findings above. Firstly, gradually increasing
543   the intensity of RLD shortens the length of stay for discharged patients, which then also reduces
544   the overall LOS in ED. Figure 9 shows how the average LOS decreases when RLD is provided more
545   frequently. The latter one is a key performance criterion for hospitals and RLD helps to reduce
546   the risk of breaching the four hour target. With only 5% of all patients on the minors pathway
547   requiring an admission the effect of RLD on the overall LOS in ED is very positive. For the two
548   pathway options for patients who require imaging, it becomes apparent that especially for patients
549   without a medical consultation, but a radiographer-led discharge consultation instead, RLD will
550   significantly shorten their time in ED (Table 3). Patients whose imaging is requested during a
                                                                                        17

                                            160
            Length of stay in ED (in min)


                                                                                                                             Pathway Option A
                                                                                                                             Pathway Option B
                                            140

                                            120

                                            100

                                             80

                                             60
                                                  Status Quo   Saturday         Sunday        All Weekend    Only weekdays           RLD


      Figure 9: Effects of RLD on average LOS for all patients and those being discharged. Error bars report the resulting
      confidence intervals at 95% level.

                                                                            Length of stay in ED (in min)
                                                                          Status Quo              Streamlined                Relative savings
                                                                   Overall    Discharged      Overall   Discharged     Overall        Discharged
          With imaging
          Triage - Imaging (A)                                      152.9         149          87.8          80.5       42.6%            46.0%
          Triage - Seen - Imaging (B)                               142.3        139.5        108.2         103.5       35.0%            37.6%
          No imaging
          Triage - Seen (C)                                         139.5        135.6        139.5         133.6            –                  –

      Table 3: Average length of stay Status Quo and streamlined pathway (RLD) setting comparing overall and discharge
      only benefits.


551   medical consultation could potentially leave the department more than half an hour earlier. In
552   both cases (Pathway Options A and B), the main benefit results from time savings while patients
553   wait for the final assessment and the actual discharge procedure itself. The reduction in waiting
554   times could become more prominent when a different case-mix is considered. In this study, a large
555   number of patients do not receive imaging. For those patients, the length of stay is not directly
556   affected through the suggested pathway changes. It is likely however that those patients will benefit
557   from higher doctor availability, yet time-wise benefits are potentially not significant.

558   4.2. Trade-off analysis
559       In the following, the time-wise availability of radiographer-led discharge serves as a proxy for
560   the likely costs. We analyse in particular effects on the LOS in ED, the number of discharges by a
561   radiographer, and the number of assessments carried out by clinicians.
562   Overall effects: Firstly, the overall effect is in line with the generally positive results presented
563   in the previous section. Allowing radiographers to discharge patients on selected days of the week
564   only, however, allows a specific focus on the most impactful time periods such as weekends. This
565   is particularly interesting when limited budgets or resource availabilities need to be taken into
566   account, e.g. only few radiographers are trained to discharge patients. Figure 10 demonstrates
567   that already very limited availability of RLD (i.e. one day per week) can reduced the average
568   length of stay in ED (note that this includes all three previously mentioned pathway options).
569   Separating out the two options, which actually involve image acquisition, we find similar effects
570   that are stronger for patients whose imaging was requested at triage (option A). Although those
                                                                                         18

                                                    150                                                                                                        160
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pathway Option A
            Length of saty in ED (in min)




                                                                                                                         Length of stay in ED (in min)
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pathway Option B
                                                    140                                                                                                                                         All pathway options
                                                                                                                                                               140

                                                    130
                                                                                                                                                               120
                                                    120

                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                    110

                                                    100                                                                                                         80
                                                          0       24    48    72     96     120 144     168                                                          0       24    48    72     96     120 144        168
      (a)                                                         Hours of Radiographer-led discharge              (b)                                                       Hours of Radiographer-led discharge

      Figure 10: Trade-off between LOS in ED and the availability of RLD. (a) Scenario solutions represented as dots,
      and efficient solutions highlighted in black. (b) Efficient solutions visualising the trade-off between LOS in ED and
      the availability of radiographer-led discharge for two pathway options involving imaging (diamonds correspond with
      non-dominated solutions in (a)).

                                                    1400                                                                                                       3000
                                                                                                                              Number of Clinical Assessments
                  Discharges through radiographer




                                                    1200
                                                                                                                                                               2800
                                                    1000
                                                     800                                                                                                       2600

                                                     600                                                                                                       2400
                                                     400
                                                                                                                                                               2200
                                                     200
                                                          0                                                                                                    2000
                                                              0    24 48 72 96 120 144 168                                                                               0    24 48 72 96 120 144 168
                                                                  Hours of Radiographer-led discharge                                                                        Hours of Radiographer-led discharge
      (a)                                                                                                          (b)
      Figure 11: Trade-off between (a) radiographer-led discharge and (b) clinical assessments against resource require-
      ments. Scenario solutions represented as dots, and efficient solutions highlighted in black.


571   patients spend more time in ED in the current setting without RLD, with 48 hours of radiographers
572   working per week (i.e. on Saturdays and Sundays) the length of stay in the department can be
573   reduced by roughly 10%. Any further rolling-out of RLD should always include an attendance
574   level which is at least as high as the weekend attendance which accounts for more than 50% of the
575   attendance. Figure 14 focuses only on the non-dominated solutions for the two pathway options
576   including imaging. The steeper descent for Option A shows stronger effects with additional hours
577   of RLD.
578   Discharges versus assessments: We now focus on the patient volume – i.e. those that would be
579   discharged by a radiographer – rather than on LOS reductions. Figure 11 reiterates the beneficial
580   effects of introducing RLD on weekends and Saturdays in particular, as those days regularly see
581   very high attendance. This comparison nicely outlines the diminishing returns of scale, i.e. the
582   effects decrease with an additional day of RLD because the share of patients per remaining day
583   decreases as well. These findings can be immediately linked to the reduction in assessments as
584   shown in graph (b). However, this effect is less strong, mainly because the subset of patients whose

                                                                                                              19

                                                    160
                    Length of stay in ED (in min)                                                                    All discharged         Discharge without seen   Dischare with seen
                                                    140

                                                    120

                                                    100

                                                     80

                                                     60
                                                                                       Status Quo   SUN        SAT          MON              TUE          WED         FRI         THU


      Figure 12: Maxium effects when introducing radiographer-led discharge step-wise, i.e. add only one day. Error bars
      report the 95% confidence level.

                                                                                      1500                                                                                   3000
                                                     Discharges through radiography




                                                                                                           RLD patients                 Number of assessments
                                                                                      1250




                                                                                                                                                                                    Clinical assessments
                                                                                                                                                                             2750
                                                                                      1000

                                                                                       750                                                                                   2500

                                                                                       500
                                                                                                                                                                             2250
                                                                                       250

                                                                                         0                                                                                   2000
                                                                                              SQ     SUN      SAT         MON         TUE       WED         FRI      THU

      Figure 13: Comparison of increase in discharges and reduction in clinical assessments. The error bars indicate
      confidence intervals at 95%.


585   image is not requested at triage (requiring pre-imaging assessment) is still a substantially large
586   proportion of the overall attendance. Hence, the above effect is mainly driven by the population
587   of pathway option A. As introducing RLD requires upskilling of radiographers and/or financial
588   resources to employ sufficient reporting radiographers; hospitals would aim to assess the impact of
589   a step-wise introduction of RLD. Overall, we were interested to find out which sequence of days
590   of RLD provision would lead to biggest effects on the total LOS in ED. We were interested which
591   additional day would yields the minimum LOS given only one extra day can be chosen. This
592   optimal sequence is

                                                    (Sunday, Saturday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Thursday)

593   and was obtained using a greedy search strategy for all scenarios results. Figure 12 reports the
594   resulting LOS changes when following this sequence. Finally, taking the above sequence into
595   account, Figure 13 demonstrates how the introduction of RLD reduces the number of clinical
596   assessments. Again, diminishing effects can be observed and a lot of clinical time could be set free
597   on weekends only which would account for roughly 300 clinical assessments. At the same time,
598   over 500 discharges could be initiated by radiographers, i.e. this also impacts other, e.g. ENP-led,
599   discharge routes.



                                                                                                                                20

600   5. Discussion and outlook

601       This paper presents a generic modelling approach which both enables users to evaluate po-
602   tential pathway changes to ED and facilitates engagement and communication about such system
603   changes to management, staff, and patients. Process mapping the current pathways through ED,
604   in particular, helped both operational researchers and clinicians to identify key bottlenecks and
605   informed the subsequent development of the DES model. The process of capturing the ED as
606   a system was supported by an extensive data analysis which generated additional insights and
607   helped to identify the level of detail needed for the DES model. We found that an iterative process
608   of modelling, analysis, and inter-disciplinary meetings with clinicians and operational researchers
609   helped to develop a comprehensive and collaborative decision support context to assess the likely
610   impact of pathway redesign options. The study demonstrates that even a relatively small prede-
611   fined subset of patients made suitable for radiographer-led discharge can impact on time spent in
612   ED particularly for those patients discharged earlier than usually. While patients being discharged
613   benefit most, the restructuring of the pathway also impacts more generally on the time patients
614   wait to be seen by a doctor because these events are less frequent with RLD. The strategic view of
615   the minor injuries pathway provided by the model can also inform decisions about the frequency
616   at which radiographer-led discharge should be offered. During meetings with clinicians, the DES
617   model was able to assess the impact of other potential pathway changes that were raised during the
618   discussion. Finally, as a generic model, the DES can be adapted to support similar restructuring of
619   pathways at other Emergency Departments. Hence local variations can be accommodated which is
620   likely to enhance credibility of the model among clinical staff and management at specific locations.
621   For all mentioned stakeholders a clear and compelling visualisation of the model and its outputs
622   is key to achieve a sufficient level of engagement.
623       Although the simulation study and the Training Needs Analysis (see section 1) were carried out
624   independently during the overall project, findings from the pathway mapping and the simulation
625   study have informed the training of future radiographers, i.e. students will work with pathway
626   models that were derived from this study. Also, the pathway mapping and potentially the modelling
627   will assist junior radiographers (and others) to visualise the benefits of this approach and provide
628   a decision support tool. Importantly, we believe the use of process mapping and DES pathway
629   modelling can critically assist in the decision making processes in health service delivery. Our
630   study demonstrates how this can be achieved in the context of RLD in ED and shows how these
631   approaches can provide clarity and a stronger evidence-informed basis for policy. Many other
632   strategic issues however are fundamental to system changes in healthcare. In the context of our
633   study, for instance, there are many issues relating to workforce and accountability which would
634   bear on the application of radiographic discharge in ED. The currently availability, status, and
635   salary of skilled radiographers able and willing to implement RD across the UK NHS is a key issue
636   set against the current context of nursing shortages, shortage of radiologists and increasing ED
637   attendances. Alternative strategies to balance workload in the department as well as proactive
638   training programmes need to be investigated. In this sense, our work has quantified benefits in
639   terms of workload reductions for doctors in ED, in particular at a senior level, who would interpret
640   images. The necessary discussion around accountability and control, i.e. whether a system is
641   acceptable to ED consultants, can be supported by a modelling approach as presented in this
642   paper. Recently issued national guidelines have also highlighted the need for immediate reporting
643   when diagnostic imaging is performed. The actual implementation and the transformation of
644   processes into daily practice demands confident decision makers (and potentially pilot phases of
                                                       21

645   the new intervention). The confidence aspect has transferred to the University side and led to the
646   development of an MSc Programme Medical Imaging: Skeletal Reporting.
647       This study has shown that the application of RLD can potentially provide substantial reductions
648   in patient journey times through ED as well as reduce load on nurses and consultants. However, as
649   with all models, applying RLD in any particular hospital context demands that many other factors
650   (such as patients and/or staff behaviour) are taken in to account. In general therefore, operational
651   research methods can provide indicative outputs which guide decision making but they do not give
652   hard and fast definitive solutions. Despite ongoing discussions about the potentials of DES [46, 47],
653   this paper has given a profound demonstration of the effectiveness of this method for streamlining
654   patient pathways in ED. In addition to a published case study by Snaith [18], our work shows how
655   this concept can be rolled out to various hospitals in general. Hence, we address the often neglected
656   way to implementation [32]. From a methodological point of view, the inclusion of staff scheduling
657   within an iterative scheduling and optimisation approach but also the integration of longer term
658   development in terms of a hybrid combination of System Dynamics and Discrete Event Simulation
659   appear to be promising avenues for future research.

660   Acknowledgements
661      The authors are grateful for the supportive feedback received from the associate editor and
662   the anonymous reviewers which helped to improve this publication. Part of this research, i.e. the
663   work of Martin Pitt and Sebastian Rachuba, was supported by the National Institute for Health
664   Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care South West
665   Peninsula. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the
666   NIHR or the Department of Health.

667   Bibliography
668    [1] N. Triggle, A&es struggle after ’sharp rise’ in demand (2016).
669        URL http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35440422
670    [2] A. Guttmann, M. J. Schull, M. J. Vermeulen, T. A. Stukel, Association between waiting times and short term
671        mortality and hospital admission after departure from emergency department: population based cohort study
672        from ontario, canada, BMJ 342.
673    [3] N. I. f. H. NICE, C. Excellence, Fractures (non-complex): assessment and management (2016).
674    [4] B. Snaith, M. Hardy, E. F. Lewis, Radiographer reporting in the uk: A longitudinal analysis, Radiography
675        21 (2) (2015) 119–123.
676    [5] S. of Radiographers, Learning (2017).
677        URL http://www.sor.org/
678    [6] K. J. Piper, A. M. Paterson, R. C. Godfrey, Accuracy of radiographers’ reports in the interpretation of radio-
679        graphic examinations of the skeletal system: a review of 6796 cases, Radiography 11 (1) (2016) 27–34.
680    [7] M. Hardy, C. Barrett, Interpretation of trauma radiographs by radiographers and nurses in the uk: a comparative
681        study, Br J Radiol 77 (920) (2004) 657–61.
682    [8] C. A. McLauchlan, K. Jones, H. R. Guly, Interpretation of trauma radiographs by junior doctors in accident
683        and emergency departments: a cause for concern?, J Accid Emerg Med 14 (5) (1997) 295–8.
684    [9] J. R. Benger, Can nurses working in remote units accurately request and interpret radiographs?, Emerg Med J
685        19 (1) (2002) 68–70.
686   [10] M. Hardy, C. Barrett, Interpreting trauma radiographs, J Adv Nurs 44 (1) (2003) 81–7.
687   [11] J. R. Benger, I. D. Lyburn, What is the effect of reporting all emergency department radiographs?, Emerg Med
688        J 20 (1) (2003) 40–3.
689   [12] H. Sharma, S. Bhagat, W. Gaine, Reducing diagnostic errors in musculoskeletal trauma by reviewing non-
690        admission orthopaedic referrals in the next-day trauma meeting, Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of
691        England 89 (7) (2007) 692.

                                                              22

692   [13] M. Hardy, B. Snaith, The impact of radiographer immediate reporting on patient outcomes and service delivery
693        within the emergency department: Designing a randomised controlled trial, Radiography 17 (4) (2011) 275–279.
694   [14] M. Hardy, B. Snaith, A. Scally, The impact of immediate reporting on interpretive discrepancies and patient
695        referral pathways within the emergency department: a randomised controlled trial, Br J Radiol 86 (1021) (2013)
696        20120112.
697   [15] C. L. Talbot, J. Ring, E. M. Holt, Litigation relating to conditions affecting the shoulder and elbow: an analysis
698        of claims against the national health service, Bone Joint J 96-b (5) (2014) 574–579.
699   [16] W. Harrison, A. W. Newton, G. Cheung, The litigation cost of negligent scaphoid fracture management, Eur J
700        Emerg Med 22 (2) (2015) 142–143.
701   [17] J. Ring, C. Talbot, J. Price, P. Dunkow, Wrist and scaphoid fractures: a 17-year review of nhsla litigation data,
702        Injury 46 (4) (2015) 682–6.
703   [18] B. A. Snaith, Radiographer-led discharge in accident and emergency; the results of a pilot project, Radiography
704        13 (1) (2007) 13–17.
705   [19] B. Snaith, M. Hardy, Emergency department image interpretation accuracy: The influence of immediate re-
706        porting by radiology, Int Emerg Nurs 22 (2) (2014) 63–8.
707   [20] M. Hardy, J. Hutton, B. Snaith, Is a radiographer led immediate reporting service for emergency department
708        referrals a cost effective initiative?, Radiography 19 (1) (2013) 23–27.
709   [21] M. M. Gn̈al, M. Pidd, Discrete event simulation for performance modelling in health care: a review of the
710        literature, Journal of Simulation 4 (1) (2010) 42–51.
711   [22] M. Gul, A. F. Guneri, A comprehensive review of emergency department simulation applications for normal
712        and disaster conditions, Computers and Industrial Engineering 83 (2015) 327–344.
713   [23] D. Hoot, Nathan R.and Aronsky, Systematic review of emergency department crowding: Causes, effects, and
714        solutions, Annals of Emergency Medicine 52 (2) (2008) 126–136.e1.
715   [24] S. A. Paul, M. C. Reddy, C. J. Deflitch, A systematic review of simulation studies investigating emergency
716        department overcrowding, Simulation 86 (8-9) (2010) 559–571.
717   [25] K. Katsaliaki, N. Mustafee, Applications of simulation within the healthcare context, Journal of the Operational
718        Research Society 62 (8) (2011) 1431–1451.
719   [26] J. L. Wiler, R. T. Griffey, T. Olsen, Review of modeling approaches for emergency department patient flow and
720        crowding research, Academic Emergency Medicine 18 (12) (2011) 1371–1379.
721   [27] S. Norouzzadeh, J. Garber, M. Longacre, S. Akbar, N. Riebling, R. Clark, A modular simulation study to
722        improve patient flow to inpatient units in the emergency department, Journal of Hospital Administration 3 (6)
723        (2014) 205–215.
724   [28] J. T. Blake, M. W. Carter, S. Richardson, An analysis of emergency room wait time issues via computer
725        simulation, INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research 34 (4) (1996) 263–273.
726   [29] M. A. Badri, J. Hollingsworth, A simulation model for scheduling in the emergency room, International Journal
727        of Operations & Production Management 13 (3) (1993) 13–24.
728   [30] J. K. Cochran, K. T. Roche, A multi-class queuing network analysis methodology for improving hospital emer-
729        gency department performance, Comput. Oper. Res. 36 (5) (2009) 1497–1512.
730   [31] S. Saghafian, G. Austin, S. J. Traub, Operations research/management contributions to emergency department
731        patient flow optimization: Review and research prospects, IIE Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engineering
732        5 (2) (2015) 101–123.
733   [32] C. S. Brailsford, R. P. Harper, B. Patel, M. Pitt, An analysis of the academic literature on simulation and
734        modelling in health care, Journal of Simulation 3 (3) (2009) 130–140.
735   [33] K. Kotiadis, A. Tako, Facilitated post-model coding in discrete event simulation (des): A case study in health-
736        care, European Journal of Operational Research.
737   [34] C. Baril, V. Gascon, J. Miller, N. Ct, Use of a discrete-event simulation in a kaizen event: A
738        case study in healthcare, European Journal of Operational Research 249 (1) (2016) 327 – 339.
739        doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.08.036.
740        URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221715007912
741   [35] R. Konrad, K. DeSotto, A. Grocela, P. McAuley, J. Wang, J. Lyons, M. Bruin, Modeling the impact of changing
742        patient flow processes in an emergency department: Insights from a computer simulation study, Operations
743        Research for Health Care 2 (4) (2013) 66 – 74.
744   [36] W. Abo-Hamad, A. Arisha, Simulation-based framework to improve patient experience in an emergency depart-
745        ment, European Journal of Operational Research 224 (1) (2013) 154 – 166.
746   [37] S. Rachuba, A. Salmon, Z. Zhelev, M. Pitt, Redesigning the diagnostic pathway for chest pain patients in
747        emergency departments, Health Care Management Science (online first, DOI: 10.1007/s10729-017-9398-2) (2017)

                                                                23

748        1–15.
749   [38] I. Komenda, V. Knight, H. M. Williams, Compliance with national guidelines for stroke in radiology, Operations
750        Research for Health Care 6 (2015) 33–39.
751   [39] K. K. Yang, S. S. W. Lam, J. M. W. Low, M. E. H. Ong, Managing emergency department crowding through
752        improved triaging and resource allocation, Operations Research for Health Care 10 (2016) 13–22.
753   [40] L. Kuntz, S. Sl̈z, Treatment speed and high load in the emergency departmentdoes staff quality matter?, Health
754        Care Management Science 16 (4) (2013) 366–376.
755   [41] S. Corporation, Simul8 (2017).
756        URL https://www.simul8.com/
757   [42] D. Smyth, P. Checkland, Using a systems approach: The structure of root definitions, Journal of Applied
758        Systems Analysis 5 (1) (1976) 75–83.
759   [43] S. Robinson, Conceptual modelling for simulation part i: definition and requirements, Journal of the Operational
760        Research Society 59 (2008) 278–290.
761   [44] S. Robinson, Conceptual modelling for simulation part ii: A framework for conceptual modelling, Journal of the
762        Operational Research Society 59 (2008) 291–304.
763   [45] N. England, A&e attendances and emergency admissions (2017).
764        URL https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/ae-waiting-times-and-activity/
765   [46] S. Brailsford, Discrete-event simulation is alive and kicking!, Journal of Simulation 8 (1) (2014) 1–8.
766   [47] P. O. Siebers, C. M. Macal, J. Garnett, D. Buxton, M. Pidd, Discrete-event simulation is dead, long live
767        agent-based simulation!, Journal of Simulation 4 (3) (2010) 204–210.




                                                              24

