Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013 Page 285–305                           285




   A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for
    Outpatient Clinics in a Large Public Hospital
     Waressara Weerawat1*, Juta Pichitlamken2 and Peerapong Subsombat1
1Department of Industrial Engineering, Mahidol University, Nakornpathom, Thailand
   2Department of Industrial Engineering, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand


          Submitted November 2012. Accepted for publication February 2013.


ABSTRACT
The orthopedic outpatient department (OPD) ward in a large Thai public hospital is modeled
using Discrete-Event Stochastic (DES) simulation. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are used
to measure effects across various clinical operations during different shifts throughout the day. By
considering various KPIs such as wait times to see doctors, percentage of patients who can see a
doctor within a target time frame, and the time that the last patient completes their doctor
consultation, bottlenecks are identified and resource-critical clinics can be prioritized. The
simulation model quantifies the chronic, high patient congestion that is prevalent amongst Thai
public hospitals with very high patient-to-doctor ratios. Our model can be applied across five
different OPD wards by modifying the model parameters. Throughout this work, we show how
DES models can be used as decision-support tools for hospital management.

Keywords: hospital management, outpatient department, discrete-event stochastic simulation,
healthcare simulation



1. INTRODUCTION
This work studies the orthopedic outpatient department (OPD) wards of a large public
teaching hospital in Bangkok, Thailand. On average, the hospital serves 6,800
outpatients per day on weekdays and 1,800 outpatients per day during the weekends.
The hospital is in the process of moving five wards (orthopedics, dermatology,
otolaryngology, surgery, and medicine) out of 11 from the current location, which is
highly congested and in disrepair, to a new building.
   In this paper, our ultimate goal is to estimate the system capability and service level
while quantifying the marginal impact of the new initiatives within the OPDs at the new
hospital site. Besides some parameter changes, such as the number of staff or the patient
arrival rates, the steps of outpatient flows remain the same in both settings; therefore,
we will use a discrete-event simulation (DES) model of the as-is ward to assess
performance at the new location.

*Corresponding Author: Waressara Weerawat, Logistics Innovation Center, Department of Industrial
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Mahidol University, 999 Phuttamonthon 4 Rd., Salaya, Nakornpathom
73170, Thailand. Phone: (+662) 889-2138. Fax: (+662) 441-9731.
Email: waressara.wee@mahidol.ac.th. Other authors: juta.p@ku.ac.th, psubsombat@gmail.com.

286            A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                             Large Public Hospital


   One of the attractive features of simulation modeling is its ability to model complex
systems with random inputs (see [1, 2] for the discrete-event simulation methodology).
For example, in hospitals, patient arrival rates, patient types, treatment types, and
treatment times are probabilistic. With computer models, what-if analysis and
comparison of alternatives can be done without interfering with the real systems while
generally using much less time and money to run experiments. These goals are common
in most healthcare simulation publications.
   Nevertheless, the implementation of simulation for operations improvement in
healthcare is less widespread than in other industries. The hospital service sector is
considered to be a secluded industry [3]. In particular, within the Thai public hospital
setting, doctors or clinical experts often serve as the executive leaders, conducting a
wide array of nonclinical operational activities such as accounting, IT, operations, and
others. The Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for non-clinical hospital operations
have not been widely imposed by national health service associations such as the Thai
Health Association (HA). They focus primarily on measuring clinical issues rather than
OPD operations efficiency. The KPIs such as the average lengths of hospital stay for
each inpatient visit, rate of unplanned readmission of the inpatient, and postoperative
infection rate are examples of the clinical focused KPIs. Some service indicator
measures such as satisfaction rates may be considered, but will be based mostly on
opinion surveys of clinical service quality. In general, public hospitals receive major
subsidy support from the government. The service prices at public hospitals can be
30-80% cheaper than those at private hospitals. Many patients such as government
employees will be reimbursed for using the public hospital services. Other
non-government employees entitled to social security or universal coverage receive
service at designated hospitals which are mostly public ones. From the patients’
perspective, using the public hospital service can be seen as a trade off between cheap
care and convenience. In using private hospitals, most patients need to pay out of their
own pockets or use private insurance. With greater income, private hospitals create
higher demand for their respective target customers by attracting well-known doctors,
getting contract services, and offering higher levels of customer service.
   In this paper, we propose various KPIs to be used for non-clinical operations’
improvement. In our example, some of the proposed alternatives have already been
implemented by executives in large public hospitals without formal measuring tools for
non-clinical purposes. We recommend the proper KPIs and show a concrete example of
using simulation as a tool to compare and quantify the marginal benefits of the proposed
alternatives. This helps in justifying the trade-offs for investment in the Thai public
hospital sector which traditionally focuses primarily on patient safety.
   Seila and Brailsford discuss opportunities and challenges in applying DES and
system dynamics (SD) simulation to healthcare [3]. Their survey paper begins by
describing similarities and differences across healthcare systems. DES and SD
simulations are described and compared using healthcare applications. They classify
healthcare models into three groups: Level 1 models consider the human body; Level 2
models cover operational or tactical levels, such as patient’s movements within the
system; and Level 3 is strategic, system-wide models that do not consider patients

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                                287



individually. DES is mostly chosen to construct Levels 1–2 models whereas SD is
preferred for Level 3. Our model belongs to Level 2, covering operational and tactical
levels with a focus on patients’ movements within the OPD.
    Weng and Houshmand model an outpatient clinic using Arena software which is one
of the DES commercial packages [4]. Their goal is to compare different resident
staffing scenarios in terms of cost, patient throughput and the total time in system.
Similarly, Raouf and Ben-Daya consider the number of doctors for an outpatient clinic
in Saudi Arabia such that the patient waiting time is within a pre-specified target [5]. In
addition to the staffing problem, many simulation studies [6-8] compare appointment
scheduling configurations with respect to performance measures that consider both
customer satisfaction (such as the average length of queue, and patient waiting time)
and system efficiency, e.g., doctor’s utilization and overtime.
    Simulation models are also developed for process improvement or for determining
the process bottlenecks and system capacity. Ballard and Kuhl model the surgical suite
operating room using the DES commercial software Arena to determine its daily
maximum capacity, defined as the number of patients treated [9]. They show that the
capacity estimated by simulation is higher than what the management has calculated
through considering only the ratio of available times and the required treatment time,
and thus higher efficiency of the operating rooms can be realized. Beasler et al. consider
a similar problem, but for emergency rooms [10]. Werker et al. aim to study the process
improvement of radiation therapy treatment [11], while Duguay and Chetouane [12]
and Brenner et al. [13] consider emergency departments. Raghavan et al. adopt a lean
approach for process improvement at cardiac catheterization labs [14].
    Related to process improvement, simulation models are often used to determine
the best operational settings, i.e., for optimization purposes. Oddoye et al. integrate
their DES model with goal programming (one of the techniques for solving multi-
objective optimization problems) to determine bottlenecks in clinical workflow and
determine the optimal number of beds for different types of patients [15]. Villamizar
et al. use MedModel software to model a physiotherapy clinic, and their model is
further applied to select the optimal operational strategy (patient schedules and the
number of staff) in terms of patient throughput rates and patient waiting times [16].
Su et al. also build their simulation models using MedModel to redesign a hospital
registration process [17].
    In this paper, we develop a simulation model for an orthopedic ward which serves
approximately 2,600 patients per week. Through on-site observations and interviews
with the hospital staff, especially the head nurses, at all five wards that will be relocated,
we find that the patient flows are mostly similar; they differ only in details such as
number and types of patients, number of staff, or office hours of special clinics. These
common features allow us to construct a conceptual flow of outpatients as shown in
Figure 1.
    The OPD process for a by-appointment patient begins with presenting the
appointment card at a registration desk. If a patient is scheduled for a blood test or an
X-ray test, it must be done before vital sign checks which include taking measurements
of temperature, respiratory rate, pulse rate and blood pressure. Then a doctor queue card

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              288




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Medical record
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Receive blood test                                    Blood result
                                                                  Present an                                                                                                   5% of by               (technician)




Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                            Require                                                                                       X-ray result
                                                               appointment card         By-appointment                         Yes                                         Yes appointment                C10                                             Receive a
                                            Arrival                                                                                                    additional testing?                                                      Weigh and check
                                                                   (nurse)               patient or not?                 (By-appointment)
                                                                                                                                                              D01                                                                                         queue card
                                                                     C01                      D09                                                                                                                                 vital signs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Nurse)
                                       By appointment (80%)                                                                                                                                                                          C02
                                                                                             No                                                                                                      Receive X-ray                                           C03
                                       Walk-in (15%)                                                                                      Accepted Walk-in/        No                 2% of by
                                       Transferred (5%)                             (Walk-in/ Transferred)                                                                                           (technician)
                                                                                                                                            Transferred                               appointment
                                        - Assign time slot                                                Available                                                                                      C11
                                        - Assign clinic type                                           treatment quota
                                                                                          1 hr. before                                       Yes                    93% of by appointment, walk-in and transferred
                                                                                                              No          Pass criterion 1
                                                                                           slot end ?                       ato accept?
                                                                                              D06                              D07

                                                                                              Yes                                    No
                                                                           Available
                                                                       treatment capacity

                                                                                        Pass criterion 2     Yes
                                                                                          to accept ?
                                                                                              D08
                                                                                                             No                                 Rejected Walk-in/
                                                                                                                                                  Transferred

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Receive
                                                                                                                                                                                             Return a
                                             See a doctor                Require        No           Require             No                        Require          No                                                appointment card               Refer to         Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                           medical record
                                          (doctor/resident)          other diagnosis?               injection?                 70%                 surgery?               95%                                          and prescription           other Clinic?
                                                                                                                                                                                             (clerk)
                                                C04                        D02                         D03                                           D04                                                                  (nurse)                     D11
                                                                                                                                                                                               C07




Patient flow of the orthopedic ward.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C08
                                                                             Yes                            Yes Receive injection                      Yes Receive diagnosis                                                                             No
                                                                                                         30%     (nurse/doctor)                      5%       (resident)
                                                                                                                      C05                                        C06

                                                                                   Receive blood                   Blood result
                                                                                        test                       X-ray result                                                                                                                        15% consult at other OPD
                                                                            5%
                                                                                    (technician)                                      70%                                                                                Pay at GP cashier counter     (exclude transferred patient)
                                                                                                                                                      Accepted                              Proceed to
                                                                                        C10                                                                                  Yes                               Yes        and receive medicine
                                                                                                               Need to see           No                patient?                            GP pharmacy?
                                                                                                                                                                         (accepted)                           (90%)         at GP pharmacy
                                                                                                               doctor again?                             D12                                   D05                               C09
                                                                                                                   D10
                                                                                   Receive X-ray
                                                                            2%     (technician)                                                                                                     No                  Pay at central cashier
                                                                                                                         Yes                             No                                                              counter and receive
                                                                                       C11                                                                                                                  5%                                                    Departure
                                                                                                                                                      (Rejected)                                                       medicine at central pharmacy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C09
                                                                                                           30%
                                                                                                     (higher priority)                                                                                                   Pay at ER cashier counter
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5%            and receive medicine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            at ER pharmacy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Large Public Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                               289



is issued. After consulting with a doctor, a patient waits for an appointment card for the
next visit and any prescription. Then, payment is made and medication received at one
of the in-house pharmacies.
    Patients without appointments (walk-in and transferred) also arrive at the OPD
registration desk; however, if all doctor’s time slots are filled, they will be scheduled for
visits on later days. Some patients arrive without appointments because they know that
OPDs sometimes accept walk-in patients. Two different criteria are used to determine
the admission of the non-appointment patients depending upon their arrival time. The
first criterion is the expected remaining treatment slots in each shift (Module D07 in
Figure 1), which applies in general. However, if a patient arrives within an hour of the
shift end time, the modified second criterion which accounts for the remaining patients
in the clinic (work in process, WIP) at the patient arrival time will be applied (Module
D08 in Figure 1).
    Besides data collection and data cleaning, the major challenge in the model
construction is to compute statistics for KPIs. Because the OPD is highly congested,
doctors in the real OPD often work past their finish time (e.g., during lunch break) as
specified on schedules. Our model captures this fact by allowing doctors to do
“overtime.” The duration of this overtime reflects the congestion in a ward; hospital
management can use this simulation output to prioritize where service improvements
are needed. Another facet of human behavior included in our model are the rules that
head nurses employ to accept walk-in patients into appointment schedules. This
decision is routinely made by intuition, and we establish concretely how it is done
(Modules D06-08 in Figure 1).
    After our simulation model is validated, we perform what-if analysis to experiment
with our proposed improvement alternatives and the future scenario of increased
number of patients. In the analysis, we illustrate how different KPIs can complement
one another, and how they quantitatively reflect the actual performances of clinics.
    The contributions of our work are (a) accumulating statistics for KPIs, with some of
which complicated by human behaviors that try to accommodate high system
congestion; (b) discussion of challenges in simulation model construction and our
solutions; and (c) demonstrating that different KPIs can complement one another and
shed light on the performance of clinics.


2. METHODOLOGY
2.1. Input Modeling
The schedule of the orthopedic ward is divided based on ten types of specialized clinics:
general practice (A), children (B), tumor (C), off-hour (D), sport injuries (E),
osteoporosis (F), hands (G), backs (H), hips and knees (I), and special consultation (J).
Table 1 shows the office hours of each ward. Some clinics are only open for limited
time during the week; e.g., the children’s clinic is only open on Monday afternoons.
Many clinics may be available simultaneously; e.g., both the sports injuries (E) and
osteoporosis (F) clinics are scheduled on Tuesday afternoons, and the percentages of
patients for both clinics are parenthesized. The office hours of clinics affect the patient

290               A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                Large Public Hospital


                    Table 1. The orthopedic OPD operation schedule

Shift                 Mon             Tue       Wed             Thu         Fri        Sat       Sun

1 (Morning)            A                A         A             A           A          D          D
2 (Afternoon)       B (64%),         F (7%),   G (73%),         J           I          D          -
                    C (36%)          E (93%)   H (27%)
3 (Evening)            D                D         D             D           D           -         -



arrival rates. Patient arrival rates depend on operating shifts (morning, afternoon and
evening), days of the week, and time of the day.
   Table 2 exhibits the total number of patient arrivals by shifts and days of the week,
and Table A1 (see APPENDIX) presents the weekly distribution of patient arrivals by
patient types and shifts. These data allow us to model the patient arrival with the non-
stationary Poisson Process [18]. Both in the actual system and in simulation,
appointment and walk-in patients arrive from 7.00 to 18.00 hours (to only 14.00 on
weekends), and transferred patients enter the ward from 10.00 to 18.00 (14.00 on
weekends). The resources’ schedule information of doctors, residents, and nurses is
displayed in Table A2. The three types of patients (by-appointment, walk-in, and
transferred) are given another attribute: either “simple” or “complicated” which denotes
additional x-ray or blood tests required.
   Besides interviews and paper/electronic records, our numerical data were
collected from a stop-watch time study conducted during June 2010. The service
time measures the length of time when service begins until it ends, and it does not
include the waiting time before service begins. In fact, waiting time is part of our
simulation output. We model the service time at different stages of patient care with
the triangular distribution because it allows us to specify the minimum, maximum
and most likely values when raw data are limited (sample size of 10–15 for each
input process). When the sample size is small, the goodness-of-fit tests (e.g., Chi-
square or Kolmogorov-Smirnov) tend to accept any probability distributions,
whereas when the sample size is large, most distributions are rejected [19]. Thus, we
choose the same probability distribution for all input data based on physical
conditions. Details of our service times and their associated resources of some
service processes are shown in Table 3.


                Table 2. Patient arrival numbers of the orthopedic OPD

                                                                                               Sum
Patient Arrival     Mon        Tue      Wed    Thu        Fri         Sat       Sun          (Weekly)

1 (Morning)          223       244      244    190        280       260           97          1538
2 (Afternoon)         96       132      156    108        149       105            0           747
3 (Evening)           63        70       68     38         83        0             0           321
Total                382       446      468    336        512       365           97          2606

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                               291



       Table 3. Resources for service processes and service time parameters
                    (module numbers correspond to Figure 1)

                                                     Service time parameters
ID              Process               Resource          (Min, Mode, Max)         Time Unit

C01   Present an appointment card    Nurse                 (4, 5, 7)              Second
C02   Weigh and check vital signs    Weight center         (30, 45, 60)           Second
C03   Receive a queue card           Nurse                 (3, 8, 15)             Second
C04   See a doctor                   Doctor                (2, 12, 25)            Minute
C05   Receive injection              Nurse/Doctor          (5, 10, 15)            Second
C06   Receive diagnosis              Doctor                (5, 15, 20)            Minute
C07   Return medical record          Clerk                 (3, 4, 5)              Second
C08   Receive appointment card       Nurse                 (5, 23, 45)            Second
C09   Pay and receive medicine       Pharmacist            (30, 59, 105)          Second
C10   Receive blood test             Technician            (2, 2.5, 3)            Minute
C11   Receive X-ray                  Technician            (2, 9, 20)             Minute


2.2. Simulation Model Construction
We develop our simulation model using Arena (Rockwell Automation) which is a
widely-used example of DES software. Arena uses a process view where an Entity is
created and pushed into the system. A model is constructed by connecting built-in
modules to form a flowchart through which an Entity flows and triggers events [18]. We
have three types of patients as the Entities: By Appointment, Walk In and Transferred.
They are further divided in terms of Attributes, such as Patient Number, Arrival Time,
Simple (yes/no), Blood Test (yes/no), X Ray Test (yes/no), among others. Figure 1 shows
the flow of patients in our simulation model which consists of clinical activities (C)
modules and decision (D) modules. C-modules correspond to processes physically occur
in the wards such as registration, vital sign checks, preparation of medical records, labs
and x-ray, physician consultation, next-appointment scheduling, cashier, and
pharmacies, while D-modules are logics for decisions.
    The simulation model is designed such that it can represent all five OPD wards by
merely changing parameters such as processing time, proportion of patient types
(appointment or non-appointment), percentage of patients requiring additional testing,
numbers of clinical doctors, residents and nurses, and percentage of patients using three
pharmacies. Table 4 shows examples of ward-specific probabilities of decision modules.
Having a single model is appealing because an analyst needs to maintain only one model.
    Due to the complexities of the hospital service which involves specialized treatments
for individual patients, large variations of output performances are not surprising. Our
simulation model returns the following KPIs:

•     Total time that a patient is in the hospital: time duration since a patient enters the
      registration process until receiving a prescription and exiting the OPD.
•     Patient waiting time: duration of time in queue, waiting to be called and excluding
      service time.

292              A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                               Large Public Hospital


      Table 4. Details of decision modules for different OPDs (module numbers
                                 correspond to Figure 1)

Module Name of decision                         Outpatient Department (OPD)

#              module            Orthopedics    Skin      Otolaryngology Surgery   Medical

D01      Require additional       (5%, 2%)     (2%, 1%)     (8%, 4%)    (7%, 15%) (60%, 10%)
         testing? (Blood Test,
         X-ray)
D02      Require other            (5%, 2%)     (1%, 1%)     (2%, 1%)    (2%, 5%) (15%, 2%)
         diagnosis? (Blood
         Test, X-ray)
D03      Require                  Yes (30%) Yes (40%)       Yes (2%)       No      Yes (5%)
         injection?
D04      Require surgery?          Yes (5%)    No              No       Yes (10%)    No
D05      Proceed to               (90%, 5%, (0%, 100%,      (0%, 0%,   (0%, 100%, (0%, 100%,
         General Practitioner        5%)       0%)           100%)         0%)       0%)
         (GP) pharmacy?
         (GP, Central, ER)


•      Time when the last patient finishes the doctor consultation by shift. This is
       important for determining the time duration that doctors spend beyond their
       scheduled office hours. It indicates if the current office hours can accommodate
       patient demand.
•      Time-averaged number of patients in each clinic and in the overall OPD.
•      Average utilization of chairs in the waiting area of the wards and at the
       pharmacies: percentage of time that they are occupied.
•      Resource utilization of supporting staff and doctors: ratio of busy time to total time.
•      Patient service levels with respect to time:
                Percentage of by-appointment patients who see doctors within 30
                 minutes after their arrivals.
                Percentage of walk-in and transferred patients who see doctors within 1
                 hour after their arrivals.
                Percentage of by-appointment patients who spend the total time in the
                 system for less than 2 hours after their arrivals.
                Percentage of walk-in and transferred patients who spend the total time
                 in the system for less than 3 hours after their arrivals.

   Since the level of hospital services vary widely, the percentage of measures delivered
within the target range as well as the minimum and maximum values should be
considered in addition to the average values.

2.3. Challenges in Data Collection and Model Construction
The process of developing a simulation model is insightful in itself because we have
to understand the actual process flow and collect quantitative data from the real
system. Similar to many public tertiary hospitals in Thailand, our orthopedic ward

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                               293



serves a large number of patients; therefore, its doctors and nurses are so busy and
the facility so crowded that allow us little time for data collection or interviews.
Unlike at private hospitals, patients arrive at this hospital much earlier than the
beginning of the office hours to get a queue card; some of them arrive 2 hours before
the beginning of doctors’ hours at 9 AM. The number of patient arrivals depends on
the clinic office hours but not so much on the area of expertise of the doctor. In
contrast, in private hospitals, the number of patients is dependent on the doctor’s
reputation.
    Prior to fitting probability distributions for input modeling, we check for input
inconsistency and perform data cleanup; for example, if the time log indicates that a
patient arrives when the ward is actually closed, this data point will be discarded. The
time logs of when patients first register are ideal for estimating the patient arrival rates.
Instead, we only have the hospital’s electronic time logs showing the times that patients
are ready to see doctors. However, prior to meeting doctors, some patients may need
medical scans or tests. We have to adjust the available time log data by considering the
ratio of patients who need prior tests (and their respective time durations) and those who
do not. In addition, the electronic time log does not specify if a patient is by
appointment or a walk-in. After we manually determine the patients’ arrival times and
types, we check data validity with the domain experts.
    The OPD wards are managed independently. We consider their interaction through
the ratio of patients using shared facilities for blood and x-ray testing, and pharmacies.
The main interactions are between special clinics within wards and not across the
wards. Dependence between OPD wards is treated exogenously. For example,
transferred patients include patients from other wards.
    Another challenge in model construction is to implement our own statistical
collections in Arena to report KPIs that are averages over multiple criteria: time
duration (hourly, daily, or weekly), clinic type, patient type (walk-in, by appointment,
or transferred), patient arrival, and doctor’s round (Shift 1, Shift 2, or Shift 3). Many
simulation outputs are time averages, e.g., resource utilization, number of patients in the
waiting area, or number of patients in the OPD. Suppose we consider doctor utilization.
Since doctors see a large number of patients daily, their actual finish times regularly
exceed their scheduled office hours (this “overtime” is assumed to be > 1 hour for
utilization calculation). We specify the simulation run time to be 24 hours; therefore,
resource schedules must be 24 hours long as well. Assume Arena returns doctor
utilization rate of ρArena defined as the integration (area underneath the plot) of the
number of busy doctors (seeing patients)B(t) divided by the number of scheduled
doctors B(t) with respect to time t:

                                                  24
                                                1 B( t )
                                               24 ∫0 S (t )
                                    ρArena =                dt.                          (1)


   Let the actual operating time duration of clinic be T. Because the area under the
        24
curve   ∫ ( B(t ) / S (t )) dt remains the same, actual utilization is adjusted to
        0

294             A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                              Large Public Hospital


 Table 5. Two-sample t-test with unequal variance between the actual total time
                          and the simulated total time

                                            Empirical results               Simulation

Mean (min)                                         124.8                        117.6
Variance                                           6803.9                      7157.7
Standard Deviation                                 82.49                       84.60
Number of observations (patients)                    200                         200
Hypothesized mean difference                          0
Degree of freedom                                    398
t Stat                                             0.859
Prob (T ≤ t) two-tail                               0.391
t Critical two-tail                                1.966



                                                   24
                                      ρ = ρArena      .                                  (2)
                                                   T

Other time-average outputs from Arena are adjusted in a similar manner.

2.4. Model Validation
We validate our simulation model via a two-sample t-test with unequal variance [19]
between the actual total time in the OPD and the simulated total time. Let the population
mean of the actual total time and the simulated value be µ1 and µ2, respectively. The two-
sample t-test considers the null hypothesis (H0): µ1 is equal µ2. Table 5 displays the daily
averages of simulated patients’ total time in the hospital based on the randomly selected
values of 200 patients from a week-long (Monday through Saturday) simulation run.
Similarly, the empirical data displayed in Table 5 is randomly selected from 200 different
patients in one week. The two-sample t-test is employed to test the hypothesis, and the
p-value of the two-sided test is 0.391; therefore, there is no evidence to disregard the
validity of our simulation model compared with the actual system. Since there are
limited data in the hospital settings, the validation process requires additional
confirmation from the respective domain experts beyond the statistical testing, and the
experts consider the KPIs estimated from our simulations reasonable.

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We first present the analysis of the as-is orthopedic ward in Section 3.1. Then we
illustrate how the simulation model allows us to assess the impacts of process changes
on service performance (Section 3.2). Our simulation model is naturally terminating
because each day begins when no patients are in the system, and all resources are idle.
The simulation run setup is: simulation run length is one week, and the number of
replications is 30, resulting in a run time of approximately 12 minutes on a standard
Intel Core i3 notebook PC with 4 GB installed memory (RAM).

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                                        295



3.1. The Present OPD
The simulation outputs quantify and confirm patients’ comments that they spend most
of their times in the ward waiting for doctors; the average total time in the ward is
124.9 ± 1.2 minutes, most of which is the waiting time in queue (103.7 ± 1.2 minutes)
or 83% of the total time. This implies that the current value-added service to the patient
is less than 20% which is relatively low.
    Figure 2 shows the total time distribution. The first part (Modules C01 to C03, C10
and C11 in Figure 1) includes the steps from checking in until receiving the doctor
queue card; the second part (Modules C04 to C08) covers the steps from being ready to
see the doctor to the step of getting the next appointment; the third part (Module C09)
considers the steps after receiving the future appointment to the step of receiving the
medications outside the orthopedics ward. For all types of patients, waiting to see a
doctor accounts for the major part of time expended.
    The average number of patients in Figure 3 takes into account only those in the OPD
waiting area. The long waits result in congestion in the waiting area and thus require
more seats; the recommended number of seats is approximately twice the number of
those currently available. As expected, these long delays are caused by a large number
of patients compared to the number of available doctors (over some periods of times but
not all the time). From Figure 3, we can see that the most congested days of the week
are Tuesdays and Fridays because hips and knees and sports injuries clinics are



                     4.0

                     3.5

                     3.0
   Number of hours




                     2.5

                     2.0

                     1.5

                     1.0

                     0.5

                     0.0
                              All          By-appoinment          Walk-in          Transferred
                                       Make payment and get prescription
                                       Take queue card to make next appointment
                                       Receive queue card


Figure 2.                  Distribution of time spent in the hospital by patient types.

296                                 A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                                  Large Public Hospital



                        100


                         80
   Number of patients




                         60


                         40


                         20


                          0
                              Sun           Mon       Tue         Wed          Thu    Fri     Sat

                                                      Day shift         Night shift


Figure 3.                       Average numbers of waiting patients in the OPD area.


scheduled on those days. Saturdays also see a large number of waiting patients because
it is the off-hour clinic where the number of available doctors is small.
    In terms of patient service levels, we can determine the percentage of patients
who can either see the doctor or spend time in the hospital within a pre-determined
target time frame as suggested in section 2.2. Simulation outputs show that 60% of
the by-appointment patients wait for longer than 30 minutes, whereas 80% of the
walk-in patients and 10% of the transferred patients wait for more than one hour.
Similarly, when we consider the total time spent in the hospital, 38% of the by-
appointment patients wait for longer than 2 hours, while 71% of the walk-in patients
and 3% of the transferred patients are there for longer than 3 hours. (The graphical
display of these results can be viewed in Figure 7 by subtracting the blue bar values
from 100%).
    Figure 4 shows data of doctor utilization rate (eqn. 1, 2) which reflect high patient-
to-doctor ratios in most clinics except the osteoporosis clinic (F). By adding one
additional doctors’ working hour beyond the normal operating hours for some clinics
(see Tables A1-A2 in the APPENDIX), doctor utilization rate is still extremely high.
Figure 4 also presents the utilization rates for different shifts of the off-hour clinic (D).
The relatively low utilization rate of the off-hour clinic (D) on weekdays is due to the
fact that this clinic generally does not have very high patient-to-doctor ratios. No patient
is admitted during the last hour of operation. In actual hospital practice, doctors usually
do not leave until all scheduled patients have been seen, even if working overtime. The
doctors’ overtime data in Figure 4 show that clinics with higher utilization rate tend to
have longer doctors’ overtime. Such data can support the decision concerning which

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                                            297




      Doctor utilization rate




                                                                                  Overtime (hours)
Figure 4.                       Doctor utilization rate and overtime by clinic.


clinic deserves adding more doctors and/or operating hours. Apparently, Clinic I should
have the first priority because it has the highest utilization rate (100%) and the longest
doctor’s overtime hours.
   The present simulation results indicate low nurse utilization rate (data not shown)
which reflects the relatively short time they serve patients in OPD. However, in reality,
nurses are occupied all the time; perhaps they spend much time on activities or tasks not
directly related to serving patients.
   The present results indicate that the orthopedic ward does not fare very well in terms
of long patients’ waiting time. The situation will worsen if more patients need to be
taken care of by the new hospital facility as the hospital has predicted. Possible
improvements are proposed in the following sections.

3.2. Proposed Measures to Improve the Present OPD
Simulation models can be employed to predict impacts or effectiveness of process
improvement plans without interfering with the real systems.

3.2.1. Application of Information Technology
Currently, medical records in OPD are paper based. They are made ready one day in
advance of patients’ appointments; however, about 20-30% of the records are misfiled
and need approximately 30 minutes per patient to be located when the patient checks
in. If the electronic records are available, the retrieval times may be reduced to merely
30-90 seconds. Electronic records can also reduce paper handling time and possibility
of lost records. With the proposed electronic system, a patient can directly go to the
pharmacy after seeing the doctor. Figure 5 compares the number of patients waiting in
the OPD waiting area with and without the proposed electronic medical record system,
and the data show statistically significant decreases in the number of patients waiting
on every day of the week.

298                                    A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                                     Large Public Hospital



                                100


                                 80
   Number of patients waiting




                                60


                                40


                                20


                                 0
                                      Sun      Mon        Tue       Wed          Thu    Fri       Sat

                                                       Without IT      With IT


Figure 5.                             Comparison of the overall average number of patients in the OPD waiting
                                      area with and without the proposed electronic medical record (IT)
                                      system. Each error bar indicates the 95% confidence interval.


3.2.2. Resource Schedule Changes
Because of the very high patient-to-doctor ratio (see the last column of Table A3),
waiting time will decrease drastically if the number of doctors increases, especially in
the highly congested clinics such as hips and knees (I) and sports injuries (E). Based
on the doctor utilization rate data in Figure 4, we can categorize our clinics into three
groups. The most congested group includes tumor (C), sport injuries (E), hands (G),
and hips & knees (I) clinics where the doctor utilization rate is more than 97%. The
second group includes general practice (A), children (B), off-hour (D) on Saturday,
and special consultation (J) clinics, where the doctor utilization rate is between
88–92%. The third group includes off-hour (D) on weekdays and Sunday, osteoporosis
(F) and backs (H) clinics. These clinics can accept more patients since their utilization
rate is less than 75%.
   In general, if the overtime exceeds one hour, simulation experiment is conducted
with increasing the number of doctors or rearranging the doctor’s schedules. Currently,
the morning schedule is from 9–12 AM (see Table A3 in appendix). We propose the
straddled schedule which uses the same doctor-hours by having 4 doctors in the
morning during 7–10, 4 doctors 8–11 and another 3 9–12 noon (see Table A4 in
APPENDIX). The rationale is that patients begin to arrive at 7 AM (partly due to the
heavy city traffic constraints), and if doctors arrive earlier, resource usage can be more
evenly spread throughout the morning and spanning over longer time. Under this
proposal, the average total time a patient spends in the system reduces from 124.9 ± 1.2
minutes (11 doctors, 9–12 AM) to 48.6 ± 9.6 minutes (11 doctors, straddled). Figure 6
compares the average total time that a patient spends in the clinic before seeing a doctor

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                                                       299



                                       4.00

                                       3.50
    Time before seeing doctor (hour)   3.00

                                       2.50

                                       2.00

                                       1.50

                                       1.00

                                       0.50

                                       0.00
                                               A     B       C       D      E            F   G    H     I   J
                                                                                Clinic
                                                         Without proposed change of doctors' schedule
                                                         With proposed change of doctors' schedule

Figure 6.                                     Comparison of average patient’s time before seeing a doctor with and
                                              without proposed change of doctors’ schedule.


with and without the proposed change of doctors’ schedule. The data show that with the
proposed change of doctors’ schedule, such time is significantly reduced and more
evenly distributed across all clinics.

3.3. Prediction of Impacts of Patient Increase
We hypothesize that when the orthopedic OPD wards move to a new and larger facility,
the number of patients will increase. Under the current settings, we study how a 50%
increase in patient arrival rates will impact the service performance (see Figure 7 and
Table 6). In Figure 7, it is shown that 50% increase of patients has a higher impact on
the total time service level with the by-appointment and transferred patients, and a lower
impact with the walk-in patients. The walk-in patients are already required to wait for
any available open slots, resulting in a very low service level. In Table 6, the overtime
refers to the time that doctors have to beyond their scheduled working hours (see Table
A2 for the current resource schedule). The clinics that operate in the evening, or the third
shift, perform the best and can mostly complete services within one hour of overtime.
The clinics that operate on Tuesday and Friday afternoons (Shift 2) are the most
problematic. The morning shift of the Saturday clinic can experience some difficulties
due to the limited numbers of doctors on duty, especially in case of higher demand.

3.4. Further Discussion of the Results
We have demonstrated how the DES model can be used as a decision-support tool for
OPD management, especially for what-if analysis and resource capacity planning. This
case study quantifies the problems of high congestion commonly encountered in large
public hospitals in Thailand and other developing countries (e.g., in terms of waiting

300                                        A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                                         Large Public Hospital



  % Service level of total time   100%


                                  80%
                                                                                                           Without 50%
                                                                                                           increase of
                                  60%                                                                      patients


                                  40%                                                                      With 50%
                                                                                                           increase of
                                                                                                           patients
                                  20%


                                   0%
                                          By-appointment             Walk-in         Transferred


Figure 7.                                 Comparison of service level of total time in system by patient types, as
                                          well as with and without 50% increase in number of patients.


 Table 6. Comparison of doctors’ overtime with and without 50% increase in the
                     number of patients. All data in hours

                                            Morning shift                Afternoon shift              Evening shift
Day                                      Withouta    Withb             Without      With           Without      With

Sunday                                   0.68 ± 0.06   1.65 ± 0.24               n/a                       n/a
Monday                                   1.39 ± 0.05   2.50 ± 0.21    1.98 ± 0.07 3.56 ± 0.22   0.47 ± 0.06 0.67 ± 0.20
Tuesday                                  1.46 ± 0.06   2.44 ± 0.23    4.63 ± 0.07 7.15 ± 0.18   0.46 ± 0.07 1.05 ± 0.24
Wednesday                                1.58 ± 0.05   2.32 ± 0.11    2.53 ± 0.05 4.41 ± 0.20   0.48 ± 0.05 0.79 ± 0.12
Thursday                                 1.30 ± 0.05   1.80 ± 0.10    1.73 ± 0.06 2.28 ± 0.14   0.21 ± 0.06 0.50 ± 0.18
Friday                                   1.47 ± 0.04   3.07 ± 0.21    5.66 ± 0.07 7.38 ± 0.11   0.56 ± 0.06 1.10 ± 0.22
Saturday                                 2.42 ± 0.10   6.49 ± 0.28    2.54 ± 0.05 4.28 ± 0.14              n/a
aWithout 50% increase of patients. bWith 50% increase of patients.




times, number of patients in the waiting areas, percentage of patients receiving services
within a target time, doctor’s utilization and doctor’s overtime). Beyond adopting the
lean process improvement, quantitative analysis using DES helps management
correctly identify bottleneck processes and resource-critical clinics. The quality of
service can be reflected through average patients’ waiting time, time in system, and
percentage of patients who can see their doctors within the target time. Quantitative
information of congestion in the clinic can be obtained through doctors’ utilization,
patient-to-doctor ratio, and doctors’ overtime.

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                            301



    The most challenging aspect of implementing the proposed measures to improve
the present system may be in convincing people to adopt new practices. This may
sound simple, but requires careful prior design and preparation of the management
process, since the hospital is people-centric and involves many stakeholders. The
study hospital will begin implementing an IT medical records system as well as the
doctor schedule straddling in some wards, especially within premium OPD services.
It is common to see large, public hospitals pay more attention towards everyday OPD
visits since it is more profitable compared with inpatient hospital services. Some
well-known public hospitals have offered premium services at higher prices for more
efficient services, such as shorter waiting time and quicker appointment turnaround
for similar clinical procedures.
    With regard to poor service, the hospital should be able to devote more efforts to
improving service levels. When patients spend a long time in a hospital, it is not only
time wasted for the patients, but also represent high indirect costs for the hospital due
to inefficient service. These inefficiencies require hospitals to provide more seats and
space for waiting patients and an increased risk of infection to the patients. Across
different sectors of industry including healthcare, the concept of reduction or even
elimination of no-added-value activities and process variation has been seriously
considered as a means to improve efficiency.

4. CONCLUSION
This case study illustrates common problems encountered in large public hospitals
in Thailand and perhaps in other developing countries. It confirms the fact of high
patient demand in a large public hospital due to low costs of hospital services and
highly qualified physicians despite low service levels. DES simulation model as a
tool enables testing of different ideas and various scenarios before implementation.
Our model is constructed with specific reference to an OPD in a large public hospital
with high patient-to-doctor ratio. Future research may test the present framework on
other OPD wards in large public hospitals in Thailand as well as other developing
countries.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our reviewers and the editor for their careful reading, and
constructive feedback. We would also like to thank the hospital staff members for their
invaluable support to this research. This research is sponsored by the National Research
University Grant to Mahidol University, given by the Commission of Higher Education,
the Royal Thai Government.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
[1]   Law AM, Simulation Modeling & Analysis, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 2007.
[2]   Henderson SG, Nelson BL, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science:
      Simulation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.

302               A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                Large Public Hospital


[3]    Seila AF, Brailsford S, Opportunities and challenges in health care simulation. Advancing the
       Frontiers of Simulation: A Festschrift in Honor of George Samuel Fishman, International Series in
       Operations Research & Management Science, Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
       2009:195–229.
[4]    Weng ML, Houshmand AA, Healthcare simulation: a case study at a local clinic, in: Farrington PA,
       Nembhard H B, Sturrock DT, Evans GW (ed). Proceeding of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference.
       1999, 1577–1584.
[5]    Raouf A, Ben-Daya M, Outpatient clinic’s staffing: a case Study. International Journal of Health Care
       Quality, 1997, 10:229–232.
[6]    Zhu ZC, Heng BH, Teow KL, Simulation study of the optimal appointment number for outpatient
       clinics. International Journal of Simulation Modelling, 2009, 8(3):156–165.
[7]    Wijewickrama A, Takakuwa S, Simulation analysis of appointment scheduling in an outpatient
       department of internal medicine, in: Kuhl ME, Steiger NM, Armstrong FB, Joines JA (ed). Proceeding
       of the 2005 Winter Simulation Conference, 2005, 2264–2273.
[8]    Su S, Shih C-L, Managing a mixed-registration-type appointment system in outpatient clinic.
       International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2003, 70:31–40.
[9]    Ballard SM, Kuhl ME, The use of simulation to determine maximum capacity in the surgical suit
       operating room, in: Perrone LF, Wieland FP, Liu J, Lawson BG, Nicol DM, Fujimoto RM (ed).
       Proceeding of the 2006 Winter Simulation Conference, 2006, 433–438.
[10]   Beasler FF, Jahnsen HE, DaCosta M, The use of simulation and design of experiments for estimating
       maximum capacity in an emergency room, in: Chick S, Sanchez PJ, Ferrin D, Morrice DJ (ed).
       Proceeding of the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference, 2003, 1903–1906.
[11]   Werker G, Sauré A, French J, and Shechter S, The use of discrete-event simulation modelling to
       improve radiation therapy planning process. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 2009, 92:76–82.
[12]   Duguay C, Chetouane F, Modeling and improving emergency department systems using discrete event
       simulation. Simulation, 2007, 83(4):311–320.
[13]   Brenner S, Zeng Z, Liu Y, Wang J, Li J, Howard PK, Modeling and analysis of the emergency
       department at university of Kentucky Chandler Hospital using simulations. Journal of Emergency
       Nursing, 2010, 36(4):303–310.
[14]   Raghavan VA, Venkatadri V, Kesavakumaran V, Wang S, Khasawneh M, Srihari K, Reengineering the
       cardiac catheterization lab processes: a lean approach. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2010,
       1:45–65.
[15]   Oddoye JP, Jones DF, Tamiz M, Schmidt P, Combining simulation and goal programming for
       healthcare planning in a medical assessment unit. European Journal of Operational Research, 2009,
       193:250–261.
[16]   Villamizar JR, Coelli FC, Pereira WCA, Almeida RMVR, Discrete-event computer simulation
       methods in the optimisation of a physiotherapy clinic. Physiotherapy, 2010, 97(1):71–77.
[17]   Su Q, Yao X, Su P, Shi J, Zhu Y, Xue L, Hospital registration process reengineering using simulation
       method. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2010, 1:67–82.
[18]   Kelton WD, Sadowski RP, Swets NB. Simulation with Arena, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, Inc, New York,
       2010.
[19]   Banks J, Carson JS, Nelson BL, Nicol DM. Discrete-Event System Simulation, 5th ed., Prentice-Hall,
       2009.

APPENDIX

                                     Table A1. Patient arrival weekly distribution

                                               Percentages of Appointed, Walk-in, and Transfer Patients (%)

Shift            Hour          Mon            Tue           Wed           Thu            Fri            Sat         Sun

1               7.01 - 8.00   53, 47, 0     64, 36, 0     60, 40, 0     58, 42, 0      62, 38, 0      72, 28, 0   68, 32,0
(Morning)       8.01 - 9.00   81, 19, 0     82, 18, 0     87, 13, 0     81, 19, 0      85, 15, 0      83, 17, 0   81, 19, 0
               9.01 - 10.00    94, 6, 0      92, 8, 0      92, 8, 0      93, 7, 0       92, 8, 0      90, 10, 0   85, 15, 0
              10.01 - 11.00    95, 0, 5      95, 0, 5      94, 0, 6      95, 0, 5       95, 0, 5       95, 0, 5   100, 0, 0
2             11.01 - 12.00    94, 0, 6      96, 0, 4      94, 0, 6      95, 0, 5       95, 0, 5       94, 0, 6    0, 0, 0
(Afternoon)   12.01 - 13.00   100, 0, 0     100, 0, 0     80, 20, 0     100, 0, 0      83, 17, 0      80, 16, 4    0, 0, 0
              13.01 - 14.00   80, 16, 4     82, 15, 3     80, 15, 5     84, 13, 3      80, 16, 4      73, 20, 7    0, 0, 0
              14.01 - 15.00    95, 0, 5      96, 0, 4      94, 0, 6      94, 0, 6       95, 0, 5        0, 0, 0    0, 0, 0
3             15.01 - 16.00   100, 0, 0     100, 0, 0     100, 0, 0     100, 0, 0      100, 0, 0        0, 0, 0    0, 0, 0
(Evening)     16.01 - 17.00   81, 16, 3     81, 16, 3     80, 15, 5     82, 13, 5      82, 14, 4        0, 0, 0    0, 0, 0
              17.01 - 18.00   82, 13, 5     81, 15, 4     80, 16, 4     82, 18, 0      85, 11, 4        0, 0, 0    0, 0, 0
                                                                                                                              Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013
                                                                                                                               303

304                 A Generic Discrete-Event Simulation Model for Outpatient Clinics in a
                                                                  Large Public Hospital


                Table A2. Resource schedules for utilization calculation

                                     Weekday                             Weekend

Resource type            Shift 1      Shift 2       Shift 3       Shift 1        Shift 2

Doctor/Pharmacy 09.00 – 12.00 13.00 – 15.00 16.00 – 19.00 09.00 – 12.00 13.00 – 15.00
Resident        09.00 – 12.00     N/A           N/A           N/A           N/A
Nurse/Clerk/
Technician      07.00 – 12.00 13.00 – 15.00 16.00 – 19.00 07.00 – 12.00 13.00 – 15.00




      Table A3. Numbers of available doctors at the current orthopedic OPD

                          Number of available doctors                    Average number
                      (1-Morning, 2-Afternoon, 3-Evening)              of patients served by
Clinic    Mon         Tue    Wed       Thu      Fri    Sat     Sun      a doctor per hour

A        11, 0, 0    12, 0, 0 14, 0, 0 13, 0, 0 17, 0, 0       N/A            5 – 15
B        0, 3, 0                              N/A                                8
C        0, 1, 0                              N/A                                9
D        0, 0, 6     0, 0, 5 0, 0, 6 0, 0, 3 0, 0, 5 7, 3, 0 5, 0, 0          6 – 17
E         N/A        0, 2, 0                     N/A                            31
F         N/A        0, 2, 0                     N/A                             3
G         N/A                 0, 3, 0                  N/A                      20
H         N/A                 0, 3, 0                  N/A                       8
I                     N/A                       0, 2, 0        N/A              38
J         N/A                          0, 6, 0             N/A                  14

Journal of Healthcare Engineering · Vol. 4 · No. 2 · 2013                                 305



Table A4. Numbers of available doctors at the orthopedic OPD for the straddled
                                  schedule

                                  Shift 1 - Morning (M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su)

Clinic             7.00 – 10.00                   8.00 – 11.00                  9.00 – 12.00

A                4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 0, 0            4, 4, 5, 4, 6, 0, 0         3, 4, 4, 4, 5, 0, 0
D                0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 3, 2            0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 2         0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 1



                                  Shift 3 - Evening (M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su)
Clinic            15.00 – 17.00                  16.00 – 18.00                  17.00 – 19.00

D                2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 0, 0            2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 0, 0         2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0

                                             Shift 2 - Afternoon
                                           (M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su)

Clinic            15.00 – 17.00                  16.00 – 18.00

B                2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0            1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
C                       N/A                     1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
D                0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0            0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0
E                0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0            0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
F                0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0            0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
G                0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0            0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0
H                0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0            0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0
I                0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0            0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0
J                0, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 0            0, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 0


                                                                                                                         International Journal of


                                                                                                                         Rotating
                                                                                                                         Machinery




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        International Journal of
                                                 The Scientific
Engineering                                                                                                                                                                                                             Distributed
             Journal of
                                                                                                                                                                         Journal of

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                 World Journal
                                                 Hindawi Publishing Corporation                                          Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                         Sensors
                                                                                                                                                                         Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sensor Networks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com             Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com                                    Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014    http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com            Volume 2014




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Journal of

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Control Science
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and Engineering




Advances in
Civil Engineering
Hindawi Publishing Corporation                                                                                                                                                                                          Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com             Volume 2014                                                                                                                                                                          http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014




                                                                                                            Submit your manuscripts at
                                                                                                             http://www.hindawi.com

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Journal of
Journal of                                                                                                                                                                                                              Electrical and Computer
Robotics
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com             Volume 2014                                                                                                                                                                          http://www.hindawi.com            Volume 2014




                                                                           VLSI Design
Advances in
OptoElectronics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        International Journal of

                                                                                                                         International Journal of
                                                                                                                                                                         Modelling &
                                                                                                                                                                         Simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aerospace
Hindawi Publishing Corporation   Volume 2014
                                                                                                                         Navigation and
                                                                                                                         Observation
                                                                                                                         Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                         http://www.hindawi.com            Volume 2014
                                                                                                                                                                         in Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                         Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                         http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hindawi Publishing Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014
                                                                          Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com
                                                                          http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014




                                                 International Journal of
International Journal of                         Antennas and                                                            Active and Passive                                                                             Advances in
Chemical Engineering                             Propagation                                                             Electronic Components                           Shock and Vibration                            Acoustics and Vibration
Hindawi Publishing Corporation                   Hindawi Publishing Corporation                                          Hindawi Publishing Corporation                  Hindawi Publishing Corporation                 Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com             Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com                                    Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com            Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014   http://www.hindawi.com           Volume 2014

